Hindawi Publishing Corporation
Evidence-Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine
Volume 2012, Article ID 959285, 18 pages
doi:10.1155/2012/959285
Research Article
Distribution and Transmission of Medicinal Plant Knowledge
in the Andean Highlands: A Case Study from Peru and Bolivia
Sarah-LanMathez-Stiefel1 and InaVandebroek2
1Centre for Development and Environment, University of Bern, Hallerstrasse 10, 3012 Berne, Switzerland
2Institute of Economic Botany, The New York Botanical Garden, 2900 Southern Boulevard, Bronx, NY 10458, USA
Correspondence should be addressed to Sarah-Lan Mathez-Stiefel, sarah-lan.stiefel@cde.unibe.ch
Received 16 July 2011; Revised 7 September 2011; Accepted 7 September 2011
Academic Editor: Ulysses Paulino De Albuquerque
Copyright © 2012 S.-L. Mathez-Stiefel and I. Vandebroek. This is an open access article distributed under the Creative Commons
Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is
properly cited.
This paper presents a study of patterns in the distribution and transmission of medicinal plant knowledge in rural Andean
communities in Peru and Bolivia. Interviews and freelisting exercises were conducted with 18 households at each study site. The
amount of medicinal plant knowledge of households was compared in relation to their socioeconomic characteristics. Cluster
analysis was applied to identify households that possessed similar knowledge. The diﬀerent modes of knowledge transmission
were also assessed. Our study shows that while the amount of plant knowledge is determined by individual motivation and
experience, the type of knowledge is inﬂuenced by the community of residence, age, migratory activity, and market integration.
Plant knowledge was equally transmitted vertically and horizontally, which indicates that it is ﬁrst acquired within the family but
then undergoes transformations as a result of subsequent contacts with other knowledge sources, including age peers.
1.Introduction
The social processes of acquisition and transmission of
knowledge,whichareuniquetoeachculture,shapelocal(en-
vironmental) knowledge (hereafter LK) deﬁned as “a cumu-
lative body of knowledge, practices, and beliefs, evolving by
adaptive processes and handed down through generations by
cultural transmission” [1, page 1252] and [2,p a g e8 ] .W h i l e
thetransmission ofLKwasstillconsidereda ratherneglected
ﬁeld at the end of the 1990s [3], this is no longer the case
today. An increased number of studies on the processes of
transmission and acquisition of LK have been published in
recent years, often linked to growing concerns over its loss
[4–8]. Zent, for instance, states that the “persistence and
resilience [of LK] over time is critically dependent upon (...)
customary methods of knowledge transmission” [9,p a g e
104]. Several authors use a model of cultural transmission
that was ﬁrst developed by Cavalli-Sforza and Feldman [10]
and later reﬁned by Hewlett and Cavalli-Sforza [11] (see
also [4, 5, 8, 12]). This model describes four modes of cul-
tural transmission, understood as “a process of social re-
production in which a culture’s technological knowledge,
behaviorpatterns,andcosmologicalbeliefsarecommunicat-
ed and acquired” [11, page 922] together with their impli-
cations for cultural evolution: (1) vertical (parent-to-child,
characterized as being highly conservative with slow cultural
evolution and high intracultural variation, (2) horizontal
(between unrelated individuals in which cultural evolution
can be rapid and intracultural variation can be high), (3)
one-to-many (as between a teacher and pupils, where com-
munication is highly eﬃcient, cultural evolution is most rap-
id, and intracultural variation is low), and (4) concerted or
many-to-one (between the older and the younger members
of social groups; this type of transmission is most conserva-
tive, and shows very slow cultural evolution and very low
intracultural variation) [11]. Cultural transmission usually
occurs through various mechanisms, depending on the con-
text, whose relative weight must be evaluated to assess the
stability of cultural traits over time and space [8].
Intracultural variation is another key contemporary ﬁeld
of inquiry related to LK and ethnobotanical research [13–
27]. Intracultural variation is “patterned according to diﬀer-
ences in individual experience and access to knowledge” [22,
page 335]. These individual diﬀerences are determined by2 Evidence-Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine
several factors such as age, gender, kinship relations, school-
ing, occupation, and contacts with other actors and sources
of knowledge. Interest in discerning the patterns of intracul-
tural variation is twofold. On the one hand, these patterns
allow us to identify relationships with social factors of cul-
tural change [28], thus providing information about pro-
cesses of transformation of LK. On the other hand, they
make it possible to infer how learning takes place [29] (cited
by [15]), and hence to understand processes of knowledge
transmission and acquisition. Nevertheless, studies on the
distribution of LK have often produced unclear and some-
times diﬀering results. For instance, most of the literature
stresses the negative relationship between schooling and LK
[9, 13, 15, 16, 18, 21, 30]. These authors generally highlight
the inﬂuence of the role of acculturation through state-run
education, which is considered an “intrusive knowledge
form” [21] that competes with the acquisition of LK. How-
ever, the negative association between schooling and LK is
low when school curricula are culturally contextualized [30].
Furthermore, a few cases are reported where some individ-
uals with higher schooling had higher LK competence than
their peers [3, 17, 19]. Zent, for example, states that the
higher ethnobotanical scores of some children with higher
schooling “may also be inﬂuenced by individual motivation
and/or natural intelligence, since usually only motivated,
smart people reach these upper educational levels” [31,p a g e
11] (cited by [19]). Regarding the eﬀect of migration on
ethnobotanical knowledge, Pieroni and Vandebroek [32]
describe two opposite explanatory concepts: (1) lower LK as
a consequence of cultural adaptation and acculturation and
(2) equal or higher LK due to resilience and strengthening
of cultural identity. According to these authors, adaptation,
as a result of cultural negotiations, is only one of the possible
strategiesmigrantsmightadoptduringtheirinteractionwith
the host culture, whereas an opposite strategy might be one
aimed at strengthening their cultural identities. While the
ﬁrst strategy would probably imply a loss of traditional
knowledge and use of plants, the latter set of strategies might
lead to a deliberate retention of ethnobotanical practices. In
their study on knowledge of forest plants among a returnee
community in Guatemala, Nesheim et al. [33] showed that
migration can lead to changes in consumption patterns, and
thus to the replacement of LK. However, they also demon-
strated that some domains of LK, such as knowledge about
medicinalplants,weremaintained.Theinﬂuenceofthemar-
ket economy on LK is another question that has interested
ethnobiologists. Several researchers have stressed the danger
that the global economy represents for LK, by leading to
deep modiﬁcations of local management systems [34, 35].
According to these authors, the market economy threatens
the social reciprocal exchanges by transforming nonmon-
etary values into monetary values. Another explanation is
given by Reyes-Garc´ ıa et al., who state that “the development
of market economies tends to be correlated with greater
socioeconomic heterogeneity, and therefore one might ex-
pect greater variance in plant knowledge as markets expand.”
[36, page 651]. Studies of the correlation between LK and
market-related activities have, nevertheless, produced am-
biguous or even contradictory results [16, 36].
In the Andes, LK has been described as being highly di-
verseandplacespeciﬁc,andtransmittedfromonegeneration
to the next through cultural transmission [7]. In the last two
decades, several development cooperation and research pro-
jects have been actively engaged in mitigating the loss of
cultural diversity and LK in the Andean highlands, through
activities such as the revalorization of Andean environmen-
tal knowledge and worldviews and implementation of bilin-
gual and intercultural education programs [7, 37–40]. It is
believedthatthepresumederosionofAndeanenvironmental
knowledge is a consequence of the current deep transforma-
tions of Andean society resulting from an increasing proc-
ess of “modernization”, as represented by the state-run ed-
ucation system [7, 41, 42], the market economy [37, 41],
migration to urban centers [37, 42], and the presence of
primary health care services [41, 42]. Conversely, some re-
searchers have highlighted the resilience of Andean knowl-
edge, presented as being capable of reacting to change and
conﬂict through mechanisms of “creative resistance” [43]o r
resilient adaptation and transformation [44].
As part of a larger research project on the processes of
transformation in Andean medicinal knowledge, this paper
deals with the patterns of distribution and transmission of
medicinalplantknowledgeinruralcommunitiesofthePeru-
vian and Bolivian Andes. Research questions to be answered
include (1) what are the socioeconomic factors and personal
variablesthataccountforintraculturalvariationofmedicinal
plant knowledge in the Andean highlands? and (2) what are
the dominant modes of knowledge transmission? Our ﬁrst
working hypothesis was that schooling, migratory activity,
and market integration—all important factors of social
change in the Andes-inﬂuence the distribution of medicinal
plant knowledge among rural Andean communities. Our
second hypothesis was that medicinal plant knowledge is
mainly transmitted vertically from parents or grandparents
to oﬀspring—a transmission mode typical of conservative
knowledge systems with high intracultural variation [11].
2.MaterialsandMethods
Research for the present paper was part of BioAndes, a
regional program of the Swiss Agency for Development and
Cooperation that aimed to conserve biocultural diversity in
Andean areas of Peru, Bolivia, and Ecuador. BioAndes was
executed by a consortium of local institutions and their net-
work of local partners from November, 2005 to March, 2011
and included conservation projects and action-research ac-
tivities (for a synthesis of BioAndes experiences see [40]).
Agreements were signed between BioAndes and the munic-
ipal governments of the geographic areas in which this
program was implemented, prior to the realization of the
activities.
2.1. Study Sites. For the purpose of this study, two of the
sevenimplementationareasofBioAndeswereselectedascase
study sites owing to their similarity in terms of ecological
and cultural settings: the district of Pitumarca in the Depart-
ment of Cusco in Peru and the subcentral of Waca Playa inEvidence-Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine 3
the Department of Cochabamba in Bolivia (Figure 1). Both
havecomparablebiogeographiccharacteristics,themaindif-
ference being the dryer climate and lower altitude of the
Bolivian site. In both areas, the natural vegetation has been
seriouslyaﬀectedbyhumanactivity.Thevegetationismainly
composed of shrubs, grasses, remnant patches of native Pol-
ylepis spp. forests, and exotic plantations (such as Eucalyptus
spp. and Pinus spp.). Both areas are inhabited by Quechua-
speaking indigenous farmers primarily engaged in small-
scale subsistence farming and are characterized by high rates
of temporal and permanent migration to urban centers and
Amazonian lowlands. Agricultural activity is quite compa-
rable and varies according to altitudinal belts: growing of
grains and cereals (maize, wheat, barley, oats, and quinoa),
vegetable and fruits, potatoes and other Andean tubers such
as Ullucus tuberosus Caldas and Oxalis spp., and livestock
herding (sheep, cows, and goats in Waca Playa and lamas
and alpacas in the highlands of Pitumarca). At both sites the
population is socially organized into peasant communities
that were created after the agrarian reforms that took place
in both countries (from 1968 to 1975 in Peru and in 1953
in Bolivia), when most haciendas (large land holdings of
Spanish and other immigrant descendants) were dismantled,
and land was distributed among the indigenous farmers.
Andean medicine is prevalent in both study areas, with the
existence of specialists such as healers (called yachayniuq or
p’aqo in Pitumarca and yatiri in Waca Paya), midwives, and
bone setters. Lay people also possess important knowledge
abouttraditionalremediesandself-medicatemostlybyusing
plants collected locally and also animals and minerals [45–
47].
Pitumarca District is located in Canchis Province, 87km
south-west of the city of Cusco, in the Southern Peruvian
highlands. Altitude ranges from 3,400 meters above sea level
in the valley to 6,372 meters above sea level at the Ausangate
summit. The climate ranges from semihumid, temperate
cold, to humid and frigid, with mean annual temperatures
and precipitation varying according to altitude, from 12◦C
and 650mm in Pitumarca (3,600 meters above sea level) to
8◦C and 910mm in Phinaya (situated at 4,500 meters above
sea level) [45]. Precipitation is concentrated during the rainy
season from November to February. The area belongs to
the “Central Andean Wet Puna” ecoregion, characterized by
montane grassland and shrubland biome [48]. The district is
composed of a total of eleven peasant communities, which,
in turn, are divided into “annexes” and “sectors”. Research
was carried out in two adjacent villages, which are, formally
speaking, anexos (annexes) of peasant communities. The
anexo Huasapampa (community of Pitumarca-Consachapi)
is situated at 13◦58 30  Sa n d7 1 ◦22 41  W, at 3,700 meters
abovesealevel,andiscomposedof63households.Theanexo
Huito (community of Pampachiri) is situated at 13◦57 57  S
and 71◦23 29  W, at 3,680 meters above sea level, and is
inhabited by 61 households. Both villages are located in the
lower zone of Pitumarca’s watershed, at 4km from the dis-
trict capital. At Pitumarca’s weekly market on Saturdays,
farmers sell their surplus production and merchants trade
manufactured goods. Formal education is provided in the
Spanish language in the anexos up to 6th grade and in
Pitumarca up to the 12th grade. There is a health centre in
the district capital with one medical doctor, two nurses, two
obstetricians, and 6 auxiliary nurses. Each anexo is under the
supervision of one auxiliary nurse, who visits the families
once a month and trains community health workers in nu-
trition, hygiene, breastfeeding, and prevention of common
aﬄictions such as parasitical illnesses, pneumonias, and di-
arrhea.
Waca Playa Subcentral belongs to Tunari National Park
in Tapacari Province, 65km east of the city of Cochabamba,
in the Eastern cordillera of the Bolivian Andes. The altitude
ranges from 2,760 to 4,100 meters above sea level. The cli-
mate is semiarid to semihumid and temperate cold, with a
mean annual temperature of 11◦C and mean average pre-
cipitation of approximately 500mm that is distributed
throughout the rainy season from November to March [47].
According to Olson et al. [48], the site corresponds to two
globalecoregions andtheircorresponding biomes:the“Cen-
tral Andean Puna” above 3,200 meters above sea level (mon-
tane grassland and shrubland) and the “Bolivian Montane
Dry Forests” below 200 meters above sea level (tropical and
subtropical dry broadleaf forests). Waca Playa is composed
of ﬁve peasant communities, in two of which data were col-
lected for the present study: the community of Tres Cruces
(17◦29 30  Sa n d6 6 ◦28 34  W; 3,330 meters above sea level)
inhabited by 49 households and the community of Lambra-
mani (17◦29 31  Sa n d6 6 ◦30 44  W; 3,450 meters above sea
level) with 40 households. The two communities are located
9km (Tres Cruces) and 5km (Lambramani) from Waca
Playa respectively, where inhabitants from the communities
and neighboring subcentrals meet at the weekly market to
sell and exchange products. Schooling is oﬀered in Spanish
up to the 3rd and 6th grades in the communities (in Lam-
bramani and Tres Cruces, resp.), and up to the 8th grade in
Waca Playa. Since 1995, primary health care has been availa-
ble at a health post in Waca Playa, where one auxiliary nurse
operates. This health post provides limited healthcare to a
total of 20 peasant communities from the three subcentrals
of Waca Playa, Jatun Cienega, and Lapiani. Basic health care
such as contraceptives, vaccination, painkillers, and antibi-
otics are provided. The auxiliary nurse also visits the com-
munities, approximately once every two months. In case of
seriousillnessesoraccidentspeoplearesenttothehospitalin
the towns of Sipe Sipe, Vinto, or Quillacollo, approximately
40 to 50km from Waca Playa.
2.2. Field Work and Selection of Participants. Field work was
performed by the ﬁrst author during numerous visits to the
twocasestudysitesbetweenJune,2006andApril,2010.Most
data collection took place between March, 2007 and Decem-
ber,2008.LogisticsupportwasgivenbypartnersofBioAndes
who already had a long working presence in these areas,
namely, AGRUCO in Waca Playa and CEPROSI, IMAGEN,
and IMAPI in Pitumarca. In each of the four communities,
initial meetings were facilitated by these organizations in the
locallanguagetopresenttheresearchaimsandselectthepar-
ticipating households. At these community meetings, it was
also jointly decided that research results would be returned
to the participants by means of the elaboration of medicinal4 Evidence-Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine
Cusco
Cochabamba
01 0 2 0
01 0 2 0
Pitumarca
Huito
Huasapampa
Waca Playa
Lambramani
Tres Cruces
71◦W
71◦W
14◦S 14◦S Peru
Bolivia
71◦10W
71◦10W
71◦20W
13◦40S
13◦50S 13◦50S
66◦50W6 6 ◦40W6 6 ◦30W6 6 ◦20W
66◦40W6 6 ◦30W6 6 ◦20W
17◦10S
17◦20S
17◦30S
17◦40S
17◦30S
17◦40S
(a)
(b)
30(km)
30(km)
Figure 1: Map of the study sites. Research was conducted in two communities from Pitumarca District in the Department of Cusco, Peru,
(a) and in two communities from Waca Playa Subcentral in the Province of Tapacari, Department of Cochabamba, Bolivia, (b).
plant booklets at each research site. Except in Huito, where
there was no community consensus about authorizing the
research because a few individuals expressed concern about
the possible economic motivation of the study, community
members from Huasapampa, Tres Cruces, and Lambramani
all gave their collective verbal consent for carrying out the
proposed research activities. In Huito, individual verbal con-
sent was granted by the participants, who either voluntarily
approached the ﬁrst author to contribute to the research,
or were approached by her and selected through snowball
sampling.
Thecriteriaforselectionofparticipantswereageandres-
idence: each community assembly was asked to make a selec-
tion representing young (recently married and/or with small
children), middle-aged (with grown-up children that par-
ticipate in family tasks), and elderly households (couples or
widows whose children had already left home). In Huito the
samecriteriawereappliedtoselectionofvolunteers.Further-
more, in Waca Playa where the population is scattered over
the territory, an additional criterion was to include an equal
numberofparticipantswholivedinthecommunities’upper,
middle, and lower zones.
2.3. Household Interviews. Semistructured interviews and
freelistingexerciseswereconductedwith18householdsfrom
Pitumarca (9 households each from the Tres Cruces and
Lambramanicommunity,or18%and23%ofallhouseholds,
resp.) and 18 households from Waca Playa (10 households
from Huasapampa and 8 households from the Huito com-
munity, or 16 and 13% of all households, resp.). The data
were collected in three to six visits to each household, de-
pending on the participants’ availability, meaning that it was
often impossible to complete the interview during one visit
and that it continued during subsequent visits.Evidence-Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine 5
Interviews were conducted in Quechua, Spanish, or in
both languages, according to the participants’ preference and
language ability, with the help of a native Quechua-speaking
translator. The husband and/or the wife—and in some cases
the children also—were asked questions about the house-
hold’s characteristics, history, and livelihood strategies. In
addition, the adult most knowledgeable about medicinal
plants (husband or wife), according to the household mem-
bers’ own perceptions, was asked to list all the medicinal
plants (s)he knew and/or used and explain how (s)he ac-
quired his/her knowledge about natural remedies and An-
dean medicine in general. (S)he was also asked to include the
medicinal plants that grew outside the research site, such as
dry plants from the Amazon that they bought at the local
markets or plants from the highlands that they exchanged
with members of other communities. Interviews were con-
ducted individually with the most knowledgeable member,
but in about 50% of the cases, other members of the house-
hold unit (spouse and/or children) were present and allowed
to intervene. This happened because interviews were usually
conducted during the household’s daily activities, during
which other members were present; these activities included
cooking and eating, washing clothes, resting during a day
work in the ﬁelds, or grazing livestock. It was thus diﬃcult
to either systematically isolate only the most knowledgeable
individual from the other household members, or to system-
aticallyensure that all household members would be present.
Most interviews were recorded and translated into Span-
ish when they were conducted in Quechua and then tran-
scribed. In the few cases when participants’ authorization
was not granted for recording or when it was technically not
possible to do this, detailed notes were taken during the in-
terviews in Spanish and eventually transcribed.
2.4. Plant Collection and Identiﬁcation. Voucher specimens
of most medicinal plants were collected and photographed
at the two research sites during walks with participants. In-
formation was recorded about the collection number, date,
locality, informant, and the plants’ local names. At the end
of the day, specimens were pressed and dried according to
standard botanical practices. In cases of contradictory infor-
mation from diﬀerent participants about a plant’s name, ad-
ditional specimens were collected in order to double-check
the information. Cultivated and broadly distributed medic-
inal plants (such as coca-Erythroxylum coca Lam.) as well as
rare or unavailable plants (plants at higher altitudes or in the
Amazon lowlands, for instance) were not collected.
Voucher specimens were identiﬁed by specialists at the
Herbarium Vargas from the Universidad Nacional de San
Antonio Abad del Cusco in Cusco, Peru, and at the National
Herbarium Martin Cardenas from the Universidad Mayor
de San Sim´ on in Cochabamba, Bolivia. When no voucher
specimen was collected, the plants were indirectly identiﬁed
on the basis of a comparison of their local names, biological
and ecological characteristics, and medicinal uses with exist-
ing literature [44, 49, 50]. Plant scientiﬁc names and author
names were veriﬁed for their correctness using the IPNI [51]
and Tropicos.org [52] databases.
2.5. Data Analysis. Data were recorded at the household
level, becausepreliminary ﬁeld trips and observation showed
thatthehouseholdwasthebasicunitforhealthcarepractices
at both research sites. When a household member is ill, the
most knowledgeable parent usually diagnoses the ailment
and decides on the treatment that will be administered—in
some cases alone but frequently in consultation with the
other parent. If this treatment includes the use of medicinal
plants, which is frequently the case, then the children are
often asked to collect these plants. As a consequence, knowl-
edgeaboutmedicinalplantsiswidelysharedanddiscussedat
the household level, which also explains why the interviews
weresometimesconductedwithseveralhouseholdmembers.
The socioeconomic characteristics of participating
households were compiled from interview transcriptions.
The following variables were taken into account: community
of residence, age, sex, kinship ties, level of education, migra-
tory activity, degree of market integration, and health spe-
cialization. For the purpose of analysis, we distinguished the
following three age categories according to the age of the
main household member interviewed: (1) young households
(20 to 34 years old), (2) middle-aged households (35 to 49
years old), and (3) old households (50 years old and above).
We recorded the sex of the main household member inter-
viewed. Where they existed, we recorded the ﬁrst degree kin-
ship ties between the main interviewee in each household
(parents-child, grandparents-grandchild, aunt/uncle-niece/
nephew, and between siblings, including in-laws). The level
of education was measured as the level achieved by the main
household member interviewed: (1) none (no formal edu-
cation), (2) primary level (1 to 6 years of schooling), (3)
secondary level (7 to 12 years of schooling), and (4) superior
level (13 years of schooling and above). We distinguished
three categories according to household migratory activity:
(1) households with no migratory activity (who only made
short trips to neighboring towns or communities to visit
relatives, sell and buy products, or go to a health center), (2)
seasonal migrants (who spend or in previous years had spent
up to three months per year either in the lowlands as agri-
cultural workers or merchants, or in neighboring urban cen-
ters to pursue oﬀ-farm activities); and (3) semipermanent
migrants (who had lived for over one year outside the re-
search area). We also classiﬁed participating households into
three categories according to their market integration: (1)
low (agricultural production mainly for own consumption,
only surplus and, when necessary, one sheep or head of cattle
soldatthelocalweeklymarket),(2)moderate(regularsaleof
agricultural products, sheep, own made wool, cheese or tex-
tilesonthelocalmarketand,insomecases,alsoatimportant
commercial centers in the area), (3) and high (besides farm
activities, these households traded cattle at important com-
mercial centers in the area, made regular trading trips to the
Amazon lowlands, and/or had a small store in the commu-
nity).Whenhouseholdsidentiﬁedthemselvesandwereiden-
tiﬁed by other community members as specialists (healers
practicing Andean medicine or health workers collaborating
with the health center) this information was also recorded.
On the basis of freelisting exercises, the number of me-
dicinal plants mentioned by each household was recorded6 Evidence-Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine
and taken as an indicator of plant knowledge. When several
household members were interviewed, the plants that were
cited by the various participants were summed. The number
of medicinal plants mentioned thus corresponds to the
household’s total knowledge (at both study sites, the most
knowledgeable household member contributed approxi-
mately 85% of this information as opposed to other house-
holdmembers).Furthermore,ateachstudysite,aninventory
of medicinal plants locally known and/or used by the 18
participating households was compiled. To identify the best-
known medicinal plants, the number of households that
mentioned each plant was tallied, and plants were ranked
accordingly.
Comparison of the average or median medicinal plant
knowledge among households was carried out in two ways.
First, the amount of plant knowledge, calculated as the av-
erage or median number of plants mentioned per house-
hold, was compared at each research site according to the
household’s socioeconomic characteristics. The correlation
between age and the total number of medicinal plants men-
tioned per household was statistically tested by means of the
Spearman Rank Order Correlation in Pitumarca (because
normality of data failed) and the Pearson Product Moment
Correlation in Waca Playa (because the data were normally
distributed). The categories of community of residence, sex
of the main interviewee, level of education of main intervie-
wee, migratory activity, and market integration were com-
pared statistically by means of a t-test when data were nor-
mally distributed and equal variance testing passed, or alter-
natively with the Mann-Whitney Rank Sum test when one
of these conditions was not met. Categories were only com-
pared statistically when at least 5 households were involved,
which was the case at both study sites for households ac-
cording to their community of residence, households with
seasonal versus semipermanent migration, and households
withlowversusmoderateorhighmarketintegration.House-
holds with no migratory activity (3 households in Pitumarca
and 5 in Waca Playa) were thus pooled out of the analysis,
and households with moderate and high market integration
weremergedintoonecategory.OnlyinPitumarcawasitpos-
sible to compare households with primary education versus
secondaryeducationorhigher,sinceinWacaPlaya,therewas
only one household with secondary education or higher. At
both sites, households’ medicinal plant knowledge was not
compared according to kinship ties or health specialization,
because there were less than 5 households involved in each
category.
Second, the type of medicinal plant knowledge was com-
pared using cluster analysis (NTSYpc21 version 2.10 L) as
used by [26], taking into account the plants mentioned by
at least one third of all participants at each research site
(6 of the 18 households from Pitumarca and 6 of the 18
households from Waca Playa). Cluster analysis is a useful
tool for identifying pairs of participants with a high degree
of agreement (on medicinal plants in our case) and kinship
relations—which are, in turn, evidence of vertical and hor-
izontal modes of cultural transmission [26]. Data were en-
tered on an Excel spreadsheet with plant names as rows and
households as columns, and cells contained the value “1”
if the household mentioned the plant or “0” if it did not.
The spreadsheet was imported into NTSYpc21 and the Dice
coeﬃcient was used to produce a matrix of (dis)similarity
betweenpairsofhouseholds.Atreewasthengeneratedusing
the UPGMA-SAHN method. A correlation coeﬃcient “r”
(normalized Mantel statistic Z) was calculated to measure
the correspondence between the tree matrix and the original
data. The degree of ﬁt of the cluster analysis was interpreted
as follows: 0.9 ≤ r, very good ﬁt; 0.8 ≤ r<0.9, good ﬁt;
0.7 ≤ r<0.8, poor ﬁt; r<0.7, very poor ﬁt. The clus-
ters revealed by the trees were then interpreted in light of
the household’s socioeconomic characteristics, in order to
identifypatternsinthedistributionofmedicinalplantknow-
l e d g ea te a c hc a s es t u d ys i t e .
The household interview transcriptions were analyzed
qualitatively to assess the processes of knowledge transmis-
sionandacquisition.Answersaboutthesourceofacquisition
of medicinal knowledge were summed according to the fol-
lowing categories, corresponding to the modes of cultural
transmission described by Hewlett and Cavalli-Sforza [11]:
(1) parents, grandparents (vertical transmission), (2) neigh-
bors, extended family (horizontal transmission), (3) healers,
specialists (horizontal transmission, “one-to-many” type),
(4)elder(horizontaltransmission,“many-to-one”type),and
(5) supernatural origin, books, NGOs (nonpersonal modes
of transmission). Likewise, the answers about the time of
acquisition of plant knowledge were summed according to
two categories: (1) childhood and (2) adulthood.
3. Results
3.1. Participating Households’ Socioeconomic Characteristics
and Medicinal Plant Knowledge. The socioeconomic charac-
teristics and medicinal plant knowledge of the participating
households are summarized in Tables 1 (data from Pitu-
marca) and 2 (data from Waca Playa). They include resi-
dence, age, age category, sex, kinship ties, education level,
migratory activity, market integration, health specialization,
and number of medicinal plants mentioned. The number of
plants mentioned was elicited from the freelisting exercises.
InbothPitumarcaandWacaPlaya,therewereimportantvar-
iations in the amount of medicinal plant knowledge among
participating households(rangeof12–99medicinalplantsin
Pitumarca, and 15–50 in Waca Playa).
No signiﬁcant diﬀerences were found between the aver-
age or median number of medicinal plants mentioned by
households according to the community of residence in
either Pitumarca (Huasampa versus Huito communities;
Mann-Whitney Rank Sum Test, T = 74.5) or Waca Playa
( T r e sC r u c e sv e r s u sL a m b r a m a n ic o m m u n i t i e s ;t-test, t =
1.082). No correlation between age of the main interviewee
and number of plants mentioned was found in Pitumarca
(Spearman Rank Order Correlation) or in Waca Playa (Pear-
son Product Moment Correlation). Neither in Pitumarca
nor in Waca Playa were there statistical diﬀerences between
the median number of plants mentioned by households ac-
cording to the sex of the main person interviewed (t-test;
Pitumarca: t = 1.819, Waca Playa: t = 0.552). In PitumarcaEvidence-Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine 7
Table 1: Socioeconomic characteristics and medicinal plant knowledge of participating households from Pitumarca, Peru. Medicinal plants:
total number of medicinal plants mentioned.
Residence Age
(years)
Age
category Sex First degree
kinship ties
Education
level
Migratory
activity
Market
integration
Health
specialization
Medicinal
plants
Household 1 Huasapampa 26 young male
grandson of 8
and
brother-in-law
of 2
primary seasonal low none 37
Household 2 Huasapampa 25 young female sister-in-law of 1 primary seasonal low none 36
Household 3 Huasapampa 21 young female daughter of 5 superior none low none 57
Household 4 Huasapampa 49 middle male primary seasonal high none 22
Household 5 Huasapampa 52 middle female mother of 3 primary seasonal moderate none 99
Household 6 Huasapampa 45 middle female primary seasonal high none 50
Household 7 Huasapampa 44 middle male primary seasonal low health worker 12
Household 8 Huasapampa 63 old male grandfather of 1
and brother of 9 primary seasonal low Andean healer 82
Household 9 Huasapampa 76 old male brother of 8 primary seasonal low Andean healer 44
Household 10 Huasapampa 62 old male primary semipermanent moderate health worker 52
Household 11 Huito 32 young male secondary semipermanent low none 28
Household 12 Huito 24 young female secondary none low none 47
Household 13 Huito 38 middle male secondary semipermanent high none 53
Household 14 Huito 43 middle female primary seasonal low none 50
Household 15 Huito 42 young male primary semipermanent moderate health worker 53
Household 16 Huito 47 middle male secondary semipermanent moderate none 46
Household 17 Huito 68 old male none seasonal low none 29
Household 18 Huito 65 old female none none low none 47
therewasnostatisticaldiﬀerence(Mann-WhitneyRankSum
Test, T = 44.500) between the median number of plants
mentioned by households that had only a primary education
as compared to households that had a secondary education
or higher. No diﬀerences in the amount of plant knowledge
were found in either Pitumarca or Waca Playa when com-
paring households on the basis of seasonal versus semiper-
manent migration (Pitumarca: Mann-Whitney Rank Sum
Test, T = 47.00; Waca Playa: t-test, t = 0.0414), or house-
holds with low market integration versus moderate or high
integration(Pitumarca:t-test,t =− 1.138;WacaPlaya:t-test,
t = 0.918). In summary, at both study sites, the amount of
medicinal plant knowledge was not inﬂuenced by socioeco-
nomic factors such as the community of residence, age, sex,
level of education, migratory activity, or market integration.
In Pitumarca, participants mentioned a total of 249
medicinal plants that they knew and/or used in the free
listing exercises. The 47 best-known plants (those that were
mentioned by at least 6 of the 18 participating households)
were used to compare households’ medicinal plant knowl-
edge with cluster analysis and are listed in Table 3.T h et r e e
resulting from the analysis (Figure 2) reveals four main clus-
ters of households based on the similarity of their knowledge
about medicinal plants. These clusters, when triangulated
with the data from the households’ socioeconomic charac-
teristics presented above, can be interpreted as follows.
(1) Young households from the Huasapampa commu-
nity, with seasonal or no migratory activity and low
market integration; the cluster includes two siblings
(in-laws).
(2) Old households from the Huasapampa community,
withseasonalmigratoryactivityandlowmarketinte-
gration (apart from household 6, which is middle-
aged and showed a high level of market integration);
the two traditional healers, who are also siblings, are
part of this cluster.
(3) Households from all age categories from the Huito
community, with seasonal or no migratory activity
and low market integration.
(4) Two middle-aged households, both from the Huito
community, whose main interviewee was male, with
semipermanent migratory activity and moderate
market integration.
A ﬁfth cluster of two households was identiﬁed even
though the association between them is weak.
(5) One middle-aged and one old household, whose
main interviewee was male, both with semiperma-
nent migratory activity and moderate to high market
integration.8 Evidence-Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine
Table 2: Socioeconomic characteristics and medicinal plant knowledge of participating households from Waca Playa, Bolivia. Medicinal
plants: total number of medicinal plants mentioned.
Residence Age
(years)
Age
category Sex First degree
kinship ties
Education
level
Migratory
activity
Market
integration
Health
specialization
Medicinal
plants
Household 1 Tres Cruces 27 young female daughter of 9 primary seasonal low none 27
Household 2 Tres Cruces 38 middle female primary none moderate none 21
Household 3 Tres Cruces 51 old male primary seasonal low none 23
Household 4 Tres Cruces 29 young male primary seasonal moderate none 39
Household 5 Tres Cruces 39 middle male brother-in-law
of 7, nephew of 6 primary seasonal moderate none 17
Household 6 Tres Cruces 59 old female sister-in-law of
8, aunt of 5 primary none low none 25
Household 7 Tres Cruces 38 middle male brother-in-law
of 5 secondary seasonal low none 15
Household 8 Tres Cruces 52 old male brother-in-law
of 6 primary semipermanent moderate none 16
Household 9 Tres Cruces 71 old male father of 1 primary none low Andean
healer 42
Household 10 Lambramani 43 middle male primary semipermanent low none 27
Household 11 Lambramani 38 middle female none semipermanent moderate none 32
Household 12 Lambramani 57 old female none seasonal high none 24
Household 13 Lambramani 50 old female none semipermanent moderate none 26
Household 14 Lambramani 50 old female niece of 15 none seasonal low Andean
healer 50
Household 15 Lambramani 63 old female aunt of 14 none none low none 22
Household 16 Lambramani 38 middle male primary none high none 23
Household 17 Lambramani 44 middle male brother-in-law
of 18 primary semipermanent low none 33
Household 18 Lambramani 54 old female sister-in-law of
17 none semipermanent moderate none 47
Households were not grouped according to the sex of the
main person interviewed (with the exception of two house-
holds from cluster 4 and the two households from cluster
5), nor were households that had a parents-oﬀspring or
grandparents-grandchildkinshiprelationship.Moreover,the
household’s levels of education showed great heterogeneity
in the described clusters.
In summary, the analysis revealed the following patterns
in the data: the factors that inﬂuence the distribution of me-
dicinal plant knowledge in Pitumarca are community of resi-
dence,agecategory,intragenerationalkinshipties,migratory
activity, market integration, and health specialization in the
caseofAndeanhealers.Thefactorsthatdidnothaveaninﬂu-
ence on medicinal plant knowledge distribution were sex,
intergenerational kinship ties, level of education, and health
specialization in the case of health workers.
The participating households from Waca Playa cited a
total of 150 medicinal plants. The 25 best known plants of
this list (those mentioned by at least 6 of the 18 households)
were used to run the cluster analysis (see Table 4). Figure 3
shows that the households from Waca Playa, on the basis of
their knowledge about medicinal plants, were grouped into
two main clusters, which in turn are divided into subclusters
as follows:
(1) Households from the Tres Cruces community.
(a) Young and middle-aged households, with sea-
sonal or no migratory activity and low to mod-
erate market integration.
(b) Two old households with seasonal or no migra-
tory activity and low market integration.
(2) Households from the Lambramani community
(apart from households 8 and 9)
(a) One middle-aged and one old household,
whose main interviewee was male, both with
semipermanent migratory activity and low to
moderate market integration.
(b) One middle-aged and one old household, with
seasonal or no migratory activity, both with
high market integration.
(c) Two old households with seasonal or no migra-
tory activity and low market integration; both
are traditional healers.
(d) Two old households, whose main interviewee
was female, both with semipermanent migra-
tory activity and moderate market integration.Evidence-Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine 9
Table 3: Medicinal plants from Pitumarca mentioned by 6 or more households (N = 18). Households: number of households who
mentioned the plant. Voucher numbers: SM no. (P) = Sarah-Lan Mathez-Stiefel no. (Peru). Source: source of indirect scientiﬁc name
identiﬁcation: [a] = photograph taken by SM, [b] = [44], [c] = [50].
Local name(s) Scientiﬁc name Plant family Households Voucher numbers [or source]
ajinco Artemisia absinthium L. Asteraceae 7 SM73(P)
alqo kiska Acanthoxanthium ambrosioides (Hook. and
Arn.) D. Loeve Asteraceae 10 SM10(P)
c´ ancer qhora Stachys spp. (S. arvensis L., S. herrerae Epling) Lamiaceae 8 SM123(P)-SM48(P)
cebada Hordeum vulgare L. Poaceae 6 SM122(P)
chiqchi Berberis carinata Lechl. Berberidaceae 6 SM35(P)
chirichiri Grindelia boliviana Rusby Asteraceae 15 SM91(P)
c l a v e l ,c l a v e lr o j o ,c l a v e l
negro Dianthus sp. Caryophyllaceae 7 SM83(P)
coca Erythroxylum coca Lam. Erythroxylaceae 15 [b]
eucalipto Eucalyptus globulus Labill. Myrtaceae 16 SM78(P)
hierbabuena Mentha viridis (L.) L. Lamiaceae 9 SM5(P)
hinojo Foeniculum vulgare Mill. Apiaceae 6 SM51(P)
kanlli Margyricarpus pinnatus (Lam.) Kuntze Rosaceae 8 SM89(P)
kharo Colletia spinosissima J. F. Gmel. Rhamnaceae 12 SM21(P)
lim´ on Citrus aurantiifolia (Christm.) Swingle Rutaceae 6 [b]
llant´ en Plantago major L. Plantaginaceae 6 SM96(P)
llauli, china llauli Barnadesia horrida Muschl. Asteraceae 14 SM26(P)
malva Malvastrum sp. Malvaceae 11 SM18(P)
manka phaki Ageratina sternbergiana (D.C.) R. M. King and
H. Rob. Asteraceae 10 SM27(P)-SM109 (P)
manzanilla Matricaria recutita L. Asteraceae 15 SM82(P)
matapalo
Gaiadendron spp. (G. punctatum G. Don,G .
Ellipticum (Ruiz and Pav.) Baehni ex. J. F.
Macbr.)
Loranthaceae 6 [c]
mu˜ na Minthostachys spp. (M. setosa (Briq.) Epling, M.
spicata (Benth.) Epling Lamiaceae 13 SM33(P)-SM120(P)
mu˜ nak’a Muehlenbeckia volcanica (Benth.) Endl. Polygonaceae 8 SM31(P)
mutuy Senna birostris (Vogel) H.S. Irwin and Barneby Caesalpinaceae 13 SM20(P)
nabo, yuyo Brassica rapa subsp. campestris (L.) A. R.
Clapham Brassicaceae 11 SM4(P)
oq’e thurpa Nototriches sp. Malvaceae 6 [c]
oqororo, alqo oqororo Mimulus glabratus Kunth Scrophulariaceae 10 SM19(P), SM38(P)
orqo llauli Dasyphyllum leiocephalum (Wedd.) Cabrera Asteraceae 7 SM77(P)
patakiska Austrocylindropuntia subulata (Muehlenpf.)
Backeb. subsp. exaltata (A. Berger) D. R. Hunt Cactaceae 12 [a]
perejil Petroselinum sativum Hoﬀm. Apiaceae 9 SM9(P)
pilipili, diente de le˜ on Taraxacum oﬃcinale F. H. Wigg. Asteraceae 11 SM6(P)
pimpinilla Pimpinella anisum L. Rosaceae 7 SM79(P)
puka thurpa Nototriche sp. Malvaceae 8 [c]
puka t’ikaq kisa Cajophora cirsiifolia C. Presl Loasaceae 10 SM25(P)
p’uku p’uku Dichondra sp. Convolvulaceae 7 SM39(P)
pupusa Xenophyllum poposum (Phil.) V. A. Funk Asteraceae 9 SM93(P)
salvia Lepechinia meyenii (Walp.) Epling Lamiaceae 8 SM88(P), SM106(P)
sangre de grado Croton lechleri Muell. Arg. Euphorbiaceae 7 [b]
sasawi Leucheria daucifolia (D. Don) Crisci Asteraceae 16 SM94(P)10 Evidence-Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine
Table 3: Continued.
Local name(s) Scientiﬁc name Plant family Households Voucher numbers [or source]
thurpa
Nototriche spp. (N.matthewsii A. W. Hill, N.
turritella A. W. Hill, N. herrerae Ulbr. ex A. W.
Hill, N. Flabellata (Wedd.) A. W. Hill)
Malvaceae 9 [c]
toronjil Melissa oﬃcinalis L. Lamiaceae 8 [b,c]
u˜ na de gato Undet. 6
wamanlipa Senecio tephrosioides Turcz. Asteraceae 16 SM95(P)
waraqo Opuntia ﬂoccosa Salm-Dyck Cactaceae 10 [a]
wichullu Undet. 14
yana kisa Urtica urens L. Urticaceae 6 SM50(P)
yawarch’unka Oenothera multicaulis Ruiz and Pav. Onagraceae 17 SM63(P)
zaptilla, pucucho
pucucho
Calceolaria spp. (C. sparsiﬂora Kunze, C. virgata
Ruiz and Pav., C. aurea Pennell) Calceolariaceae 9 SM1(P)-SM111(P)-SM110(P)
1
2
3
4
5
0.39 0.5 0.61 0.72 0.83
Coeﬃcient
HH1
HH2
HH3
HH5
HH8
HH6
HH9
HH18
HH12
HH14
HH17
HH15
HH16
HH10
HH13
HH11
HH4
HH7
Figure 2:Treeresultingfromclusteranalysisof18households’knowledge about47medicinal plantsinPitumarca,Peru.HHno.:household
number. Correlation coeﬃcient r = 0.81 (good ﬁt).
(e) Two middle-aged households with semiperma-
nent migratory activity and low to moderate
market integration.
According to this interpretation of the cluster analysis re-
sults, the factors that inﬂuence the distribution of medicinal
plant knowledge in Waca Playa are the community of resi-
dence, age category, migratory activity, market integration,
and health specialization. Sex, kinship ties (intra- and inter-
generational) and education level do not inﬂuence medicinal
plantknowledgedistribution.Interestingly,theseresultscon-
ﬁrm the patterns identiﬁed in Pitumarca.
3.2.AcquisitionofMedicinalPlantKnowledge. Figure4shows
how participating households in the two case study areas ac-
quired their medicinal plant knowledge. As the ﬁgure il
lustrates, households acquired their knowledge through a
variety of sources. Vertical transmission (parents and grand-
parents) was mentioned by 67% and 94% of the households
from Pitumarca and Waca Playa, respectively, (29 house-
holds in total), whereas horizontal transmission (neighbors,
extended family, healers, specialists, and elders) was reported
by 72% of the households from Pitumarca and by all the
households from Waca Playa (31 households in total).
SixhouseholdsfromPitumarcaandﬁvefromWacaPlaya
learned about medicinal plants from a traditional healer or
specialist (one-to-many mode of cultural transmission). But
in the case of four of the households from Pitumarca, this
specialist happened to be the parent or grandparent of the
participant and was thus pooled out of the analysis, because
it also accounts for a vertical mode of cultural transmission.
Elders from the community were also reported as a source of
knowledge (many-to-one transmission).
In addition to these interpersonal modes of cultural
transmission, other types of knowledge sources were cited byEvidence-Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine 11
Table 4: Medicinal plants from Waca Playa, Bolivia, mentioned by 6or morehouseholds (N = 18). Households: number of households who
mentioned the plant. Voucher numbers: SM no. (B) = Sarah-Lan Mathez-Stiefel no. (Bolivia), RB no. = Regine Brandt no. Source: source of
indirect scientiﬁc name identiﬁcation: [a] = [44], [b]= [49].
Local name(s) Scientiﬁc name Plant family Households Voucher numbers [or source]
andres huaylla Cestrum parqui L’H´ er Solanaceae 17 SM9(B), SM132(B), SM88(B)
chini mu˜ na, mu˜ na Clinopodium bolivianum (Benth.)
Kuntze Lamiaceae 11 SM15(B), SM93(B)
coca Erythroxylum coca Lam. Erythroxylaceae 16 [a]
durazno Prunus persica (L.) Batsch Rosaceae 7 SM55(B)
kalisto, eucalipto Eucalyptus globulus Labill. Myrtaceae 16 SM6(B), SM14(B), SM87(B)
khara malva, malva Malva parviﬂora L. Malvaceae 8 SM32(B), SM33(B), SM73(B), SM83(B)
khara sapi, kharasa, leche
leche Sonchus oleraceus L. Asteraceae 8 SM58(B), SM66(B), SM134(B)
k’oa mu˜ na, haya mu˜ na,
mu˜ na Minthostachys ovata (Briq.) Epling Lamiaceae 11 SM10(B), SM76(B), SM57(B)
lanti lanti Plantago spp. (P. orbignyana
Steinh. ex Decne., P. lanceolata L.) Plantaginaceae 6 SM61(B), SM103(B)-SM125(B),
SM129(B)
llave Tripodanthus acutifolius (Ruiz and
Pav.) Tiegh Asteraceae 9 [b]
manzanilla Matricaria chamomilla L. Asteraceae 10 SM62(B)
molle Schinus molle L. Anacardiaceae 15 SM16(B), SM89(B)
paiqo Chenopodium ambrosioides L. Amaranthaceae 7 SM29(B), SM60(B), SM67(B), SM91(B)
raqacho, raqa raqa Lepechinia graveolens (Regel)
Epling Lamiaceae 9 SM18(B)
romansa, lanti lanti Rumex sp. Polygonaceae 10 SM22(B), SM70(B)
salvia Undet. 8 —
sauco Sambucus nigra L. subsp.
peruviana (Kunth) Bolli Adoxaceae 7 SM75(B)
sira ch’ilka Undet. 6 —
sira paiqo, ch’ini paiqo Chenopodium ambrosioides L. Amaranthaceae 14 SM128(B)
t’ola Baccharis dracunculifolia DC. Asteraceae 7 SM13(B), SM100(B)
uri uri Pluchea fastigiata Griseb. Asteraceae 7 RB47.14
verbena Verbena hispida Ruiz and Pav. Verbenaceae 8 SM72(B)
wacanwayo Iresine aﬀ. diﬀusa Humb. and
Bonpl. ex Willd. Amaranthaceae 8 SM113(B)
wira wira Gnaphalium dombeyanum DC. Asteraceae 8 SM94(B), SM127(B)
zapatilla Calceolaria engleriana Kraenzl. Calceolariaceae 6 SM21(B), SM78(B)
the participants. The specialized knowledge of Andean heal-
ers, for instance, is usually believed to have a supernatural
origin. Three (two from Pitumarca and one from Waca
Playa) of the four specialists interviewed mentioned that
their knowledge about traditional medicine could be ex-
plained by a rayo event (being struck by lightning), or by
having been taught by the apus or parajes (sacred mountains
that surround the communities). Four households (three
from Pitumarca and one from Waca Playa) also mentioned
that they became skilled in recent years through books or
workshops about medicinal plants conducted by NGOs ac-
tive in the area or through media such as local newspaper or
radio broadcasts.
Regarding the time of acquisition of participants’ medic-
inal plant knowledge, ten households from Pitumarca (56%)
and fourteen from Waca Playa (78%) mentioned that they
had learned as children, while twelve (67%) and eleven
(61%) households from Pitumarca and Waca Playa, respec-
tively, said that they acquired their skills as adults. Both times
were sometimes mentioned by one household, which ex-
plains why the sum is greater than 18 at each study site. Here,
also there seem to be equal portions of horizontally versus
vertically acquired plant knowledge Knowledge about plant
remedies is typically ﬁrst acquired during childhood within
the family (24 households in total), but an important part
of this knowledge is also gained in adulthood, usually from
people other than parents or grandparents (23 households).
As the quotations below demonstrate, there is a strong
perception, widely shared among the participants, that me-
dicinal plant knowledge is not “taught” as such, but it is the
result of one’s own personal active quest. In order to ac-
quire medicinal knowledge, one needs to ask people in one’s12 Evidence-Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine
1.a
1.b
2.a
2.b
2.c
2.d
2.e
HH1
HH4
HH2
HH5
HH3
HH6
HH7
HH8
HH17
HH12
HH16
HH9
HH14
HH13
HH18
HH10
HH11
HH15
0.52 0.59 0.66 0.73 0.8
Coeﬃcient
Figure 3: Tree resulting from cluster analysis of 18 households’ knowledge about 25 medicinal plants in Waca Playa, Bolivia. HH no.:
household number. Correlation coeﬃcient r = 0.64 (poor ﬁt).
12
8
2
3
6
17
9
5
4
2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
N
u
m
b
e
r
o
f
h
o
u
s
e
h
o
l
d
s
(
N
=
1
8
)
Pitumarca
Waca Playa
N
e
i
g
h
b
o
r
s
,
e
x
t
e
n
d
e
d
f
a
m
i
l
y
H
e
a
l
e
r
s
,
s
p
e
c
i
a
l
i
s
t
s
E
l
d
e
r
s
S
u
p
e
r
n
a
t
u
r
a
l
o
r
i
g
i
n
,
b
o
o
k
s
,
N
G
O
s
P
a
r
e
n
t
s
,
g
r
a
n
d
p
a
r
e
n
t
s
Figure 4: Sources of medicinal plant knowledge for 18 households
from Pitumarca and 18 households from Waca Playa. Diﬀerent
sources were sometimes mentioned by one household, which ex-
plains why the sum is greater than 18 at each study site.
immediate environment, listen, look, try, and practice. And
the capacity to learn will depend on interest, curiosity, intel-
ligence, and in the end on personal ability.
“Nobody taught me [about medicinal plants]; I
learned on my own, looking at what other people
were doing. (...) I do not teach my children; they
l e a r no n l yb yl o o k i n g .[ Id on o tt e a c ht h e m ]b e -
cause they do not understand; but if they see they
get to understand better. They always see.” (Waca
Playa-Household 14, 29/04/2008)
“From the elders, looking at the elders I learned
[about healing]. I got more interested and with
practice learned more and more. Thanks to my
intelligence and ability I got to learn (..) My chil-
dren are intelligent; they will learn by looking
at what I am doing.” (Pitumarca-Household 8,
29/07/2008)
Medicinal plant knowledge is freely shared among com-
munity members out of solidarity and in a relationship of
reciprocity, either through informal exchanges and com-
ments during daily activities or when someone is ill and
needs help from his/her neighbors or kin (see quotations
below). In fact, the acquisition of medicinal plant knowledge
is often the result of concrete illnesses that occur within the
family, “as we walk through life”, and that oblige one to look
foraspeciﬁcremedywithinthecommunalbodyoftherapeu-
tic knowledge. According to the households interviewed, this
also explains why women are usually more knowledgeable
about plant remedies than men, since they need to care for
the children when they are ill.
“When I went to the chacra [ﬁelds], I asked the
elders [about medicinal plants] and they also
asked me; this way we are sharing, this is our wis-
dom. (Pitumarca-Household 15, 01/10/2008)”
“I learned [about medicinal plants] since I got
ill; the neighbors bring me the plants. (...)Id o
not teach them [my children]; on their own they
learn when someone from the family gets ill. ForEvidence-Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine 13
example,sinceIgotbadlyill(...)myhusbandand
my daughter learned to heal. (...)M yd a u g h t e r
knows how to gather thurpa (Nototriches spp.),
oq’e thurpa (Nototriches sp.), puka thurpa (No-
totriches sp.), chili chili (Geranium ﬁlipes Killip),
from faraway places up in the mountains; she
knows much more about this than me. Because I
was ill, she asked the people that live in the com-
munities; so from various sources of informa-
tion [she learned].” (Pitumarca-Household 5,
23/07/2008)
The following narrative from a woman who grew up in
town before coming back to the rural area where her parents
lived illustrates that knowing how to use medicinal plants is
considered to be among the skills needed to live in the com-
munity, skills which are not shared by people who live in
urban centers.
“When I was a child I did not know the medicinal
plants. When I arrived here I saw my mother, she
would heal my little sisters and my father when
they would get ill. When I would get ill she also
healed me, and by looking I learned.” (Waca
Playa-Household 1, 01/12/2007)
4. Discussion
4.1. Distribution of Medicinal Plant Knowledge. Our ﬁndings
show that there is an important intracultural variation of
medicinal plant knowledge in terms of the number of plants
known at both study sites, but no clear patterns could be
identiﬁedtoexplainthisvariation.Factorsgenerallyreported
in the literature to account for diﬀerences in ethnobotanical
knowledge and LK in general such as age [16, 21, 23, 53–56],
sex [16, 18, 22, 23, 55, 57], schooling [9, 13, 15, 16, 18, 21,
30, 55], migration [42], or the market economy [34, 35, 41]
didnotinﬂuencethenumberofmedicinalplantsmentioned.
A possible explanation for this result lies in important vari-
ations with respect to the level of specialization among par-
ticipants. Indeed, the participants ranged from lay people
with little knowledge to specialists. Arias Toledo et al. [17]
encountered the same situation in the Cordoba region in
Argentina. These ﬁndings imply that other factors, such as
individual motivation, experience, and personality may play
a more important role in inﬂuencing individual ethnobotan-
ical knowledge than socioeconomic and other personal cir-
cumstances. This hypothesis is supported by our data which
show that the acquisition of plant knowledge is the result of
a personal quest and one’s own interest and ability. These
ﬁndingsalsosuggestthatAndeanmedicinalplantknowledge
is not necessarily under threat of being lost due to factors of
social change. This last hypothesis needs to be corroborated
by complementary studies.
Contrary to our ﬁndings on the amount of plant knowl-
edge, cluster analysis revealed clear patterns of variation in
the type of medicinal plant knowledge at each study site and
showed that the distribution of ethnobotanical knowledge
was inﬂuenced by the community of residence, age, intra-
generational kin relations, migratory activity, and market
integration.Ourstudythusshowsthatknowledgeaboutpar-
ticular medicinal plants is highly patterned, even within one
culturallyhomogeneous grouplivinginthesamebiophysical
territory. At each study site, households shared similar
knowledge with their fellow community members, but dem-
onstrated a type of knowledge distinct from households
in neighboring communities. Other authors also describe
Andean agricultural knowledge as “art de la localit´ e” (“a local
art”) and conclude that it is intimately associated with a
particular place [7, 58, page 209]. As a matter of fact, our
study shows that medicinal plant knowledge is a skill needed
to live in a particular community, as the example of a
woman who had returned to the rural area after having lived
in the city illustrated. Our interpretation of these results
is that medicinal plant knowledge is a locally specialized
resource that is part of the reciprocal exchanges that form
the basis of Andean society [59] and that the extent to which
this knowledge is shared within one community reﬂects
the strength of its social organization. This was conﬁrmed
by the results showing the high importance of neighbors,
elders,andtheextendedfamilyingeneralinthetransmission
of knowledge about natural remedies, especially through
their support during episodes of illness. Andean medicine is
indeed one of the keystones of local society [60], and (com-
munity) specialization and reciprocity are among its struc-
tural features [59].
Another important ﬁnding from our study is that age
peers, including siblings in the case of Pitumarca, have sim-
ilar knowledge about medicinal plants, whereas this is not
the case for kin from diﬀerent generations, namely parents-
children and grandparents-grandchildren. This result con-
tradicts the hypothesis of a mainly vertical knowledge trans-
mission.Wesuggestthatlifeexperiencemaybeanimportant
determinant of medicinal plant knowledge. People from the
same generation are exposed to the same processes of change
in the socioecological context throughout their lives (for in-
stance,variablelevelsofmigratoryactivityofthepopulation,
changes in the composition of vegetation or the status of na-
tural resources, the presence of NGOs, etc.), and thus also
to the same new sources of medicinal plant knowledge. (for
instance, actors and contexts encountered during the migra-
tory experience, new plants available locally, a workshop
on medicinal plants conducted in the community, etc.).
We believe that the prevalence of migration processes that
aﬀect all households at the study sites, but at diﬀerent levels
throughout the last decades, may account for the homoge-
nization of plant knowledge among age peers. Another ex-
planation is that age peers may face similar health problems
and thus have the same need to know about natural rem-
edies for treating them. Based on a survey conducted in Oax-
aca, Mexico, Giovannini et al. [13] explain the positive
correlation between age and knowledge and use of medicinal
plantsbythefactthatpeoplearemorelikelytobecomeilland
be responsible for the health of others as they get older, and
hence acquire more knowledge about medicinal plants. Our
results also show that participants often acquired knowledge
about speciﬁc plants when they faced a concrete illness, or
wereresponsiblefortreatingotherhouseholdmembers,such
as the case of women who care for young children.14 Evidence-Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine
The role of life experiences in individual medicinal plant
knowledge can also explain our ﬁndings regarding the in-
ﬂuence of migration and market integration. In Pitumarca
and Waca Playa, households were often clustered according
totheirdegreeofmigrationandmarketactivities.Bothproc-
esses imply diﬀerent degrees of mobility, since higher market
integration meant traveling to the commercial centers of the
region or to the Amazon lowlands. Consequently, both mi-
grationandmarketactivitiesimplydiﬀerent degrees ofinter-
actionwithnoncommunitymembers,andthusaccesstonew
sources of medicinal plant knowledge. We postulate that the
mobility of Andean households places them in situations of
“encounters at multiple [social] interfaces” that stimulate the
emergence of new knowledge as a product of the interaction
between diﬀerent actors [61]. Interestingly, our results show
no diﬀerence in the amount of plant knowledge (number of
plants reported) of households according to their migratory
activity or degree of market integration. It thus remains to be
elucidated whether the participating households have main-
tained their botanical knowledge or partially lost it and
adopted new knowledge during their stay(s) outside the re-
search sites. Nevertheless, the inﬂuence of mobility on me-
dicinal plant knowledge is an indicator of the permeability of
local medicinal systems by external inﬂuences. Ingold [62]
describes knowledge about the world as a process of en-
skillment in the context of people’s practical engagement
with the environment. We believe that this is also true for
migratory processes and that the attitude of a personal quest
for medicinal plant knowledge described by the participants
(by observing, questioning, and trying) is maintained and
perhaps even enhanced during the migratory experience,
giving continuity to the learning process in the host environ-
ment. In their study on medicinal plant use among Bolivian
and Peruvian migrants in London, Ceuterick et al. [44]
demonstratedhowtheresilienceofAndeanmigrantcommu-
nities includes processes of transformation, learning, reorga-
nization, and renewal.
The fact that Andean healers at the study site share simi-
lar medicinal plant knowledge with their professional peers
could be expected, since the distinction between specialist
and lay knowledge is widely recognized in ethnomedicinal
research around the world. In their paper on healers’ knowl-
edge in Bolivia, Vandebroek et al. [60] revised the literature
about the speciﬁc modes of acquisition and transmission of
specialist knowledge in several African and Latin-American
countries. The three main sources of specialist knowledge in-
cludethefamilysphere,otherexperiencedhealersoutsidethe
family, and a supernatural origin (dreaming or communica-
tion with spirits). This was also observed in our study, where
Andean healers reported that the source of their specialist
knowledge was supernatural. We wish to draw attention to
two additional aspects in our results. First, healers are not
necessarily the most knowledgeable participants in their
communitiesintermsofthetotalnumberofplantsreported.
At both study sites, some lay people actually possess a high-
er level of plant knowledge than the Andean specialists.
Second,theclustersthatincludethehealersinPitumarcaalso
include lay persons, and at both study sites, the clusters that
contain halers are not isolated from the other clusters. These
observations indicate that what diﬀerentiates Andean healers
from lay people is not necessarily their high level of or ex-
ceptional idiosyncratic type of medicinal plant knowledge,
but other personal attributes such as the supernatural origin
of their knowledge.
Level of education had no inﬂuence on the distribution
of the amount or type of medicinal plant knowledge among
participating households, which contradicts previous ﬁnd-
ings about the negative correlation between schooling and
LK [9, 13, 15, 16, 18, 21, 27, 30]. In line with Robinson [19],
we believe that individual motivation has more inﬂuence on
ethnobtanical knowledge than state-run education or other
socioeconomic indicators of modernization. In the Argen-
tinean Cordoba mountains, Arias Toledo et al. [17]r e p o r t e d
on a group of persons with superior education, usually mi-
grantsfromurbancenters,whoknewaboutagreaternumber
of medicinal plants than their peers with less education. The
former acquired their knowledge about plants through spe-
cialized books and training, or by asking local specialists.
Similarly, participating households with the highest levels of
education at both our research sites (secondary level or high-
er) exhibited a high personal interest in medicinal plants and
expressedthedesiretoincreasetheirknowledgebyobserving
ahealers,readingspecializedbooks,orparticipatinginwork-
shops. Our ﬁndings imply that formal education does not
compete with local forms of knowledge at our research sites.
Not only do both systems coexist, but schooling may even
indirectly strengthen medicinal plant knowledge.
4.2.TransmissionofMedicinalPlantKnowledge. Ourﬁndings
about the sources of acquisition of medicinal plant knowl-
edge indicate that there are equal proportions of vertical ver-
sus horizontal modes of transmission at both study sites,
which is a rejection of our working hypothesis and contra-
dicts the results from other studies that state that LK is
mainly transmitted by parents to oﬀspring [3, 5, 11]. McEl-
reath and Strimling [63] suggest that some ethnographic
studies may have overestimated the importance of vertical
transmission by focusing mainly on learning in children [63]
(cited by [12]). Our own results support their position,
since a comparable number of participants recalled that
their teachers had been their parents or grandparents during
childhood (vertical acquisition) as compared to those who
had learned from other sources of knowledge during adult-
hood (horizontal acquisition). This may indicate that medic-
inal plant knowledge is ﬁrst acquired within the family circle
duringchildhoodbutthatitthenundergoestransformations
as a result of subsequent contacts with other knowledge
sources, including age peers. As Barsh argues, “every indi-
vidual is necessarily engaged in a lifelong personal search
for ecological understanding” [64, page 74]. Similar results
about the increase of the importance of nonvertical trans-
mission with age have also been reported in the literature
[11, 12, 63].
Local healers represent another source of medicinal plant
knowledge at our study sites (reported by almost one third of
all participating households). Furthermore, the results from
the cluster analysis indicate that Andean healers have a cer-
tain amount of medicinal plant knowledge in common withEvidence-Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine 15
lay people from their communities. This observation sug-
gests that healers are important actors in the cultural trans-
mission of generalist knowledge, which represents a one-to-
many mode of cultural transmission and thus of a highly
dynamic knowledge system [11]. Lozada et al. [5]r e p o r t e d
that experienced Mapuche healers used to play an important
roleinthetransmissionandconservationofplantknowledge
in Northwestern Patagonia but that this was no longer the
case and that knowledge transmission now occurred mainly
vertically within the family. We might thus predict that the
possible disappearance of these specialized healers, all elder
people, in the next decades, could lead to transformations in
the patterns of medicinal plant transmission. If the role of
healers as knowledge transmitters is taken over by the older
generation (either the parents or the community elders),
then the change will be in the direction of a greater propor-
tion of conservative transmission modes. Conversely, if the
role of specialist is taken over by highly motivated and skilled
individuals (that can be peers or neighbors from the young
generation), this transformation would lead to a prevalence
of dynamic transmission modes. As a matter of fact, our re-
sults also showed that other nonpersonal sources, linked to
individual motivation and experience played a role in the
acquisition of plant knowledge, and that these individual
characteristics might indeed be the dominant factor of the
amount of ethnobotanical knowledge.
4.3. Methodological Limitations of the Study. The method-
ologicaltoolchosenforthisresearchwasfreelisting.Theaad-
vantage of freelisting and other types of open-ended ques-
tions frequently used in the social sciences is that responses
from participants are not directed in any way by the re-
searcher, thus allowing in our case for an unbiased inventory
of the most signiﬁcant plants known to and/or used by each
participant. Freelists are useful for assessing who in a com-
munity knows more (or less) about medicinal plants [65].
The disadvantage of this tool is that a plant might not be
mentioned, because it was simply “forgotten” during the ex-
ercise, as opposed to lack of knowledge about it. This can
limitthesubsequentuseofstatisticalclusteranalysisforcom-
parison of knowledge between participants. The alternative
would have been to undertake systematic data collection by
meansofaspecimenidentiﬁcationtaskwitheachhousehold,
based on a selected list of medicinal plant vouchers (what
Medeiros et al. [66] call a “check-list interview”). We have
taken three measures to minimize methodological bias as a
result of freelisting. First, interviews were carried out during
several visits to each household, and in some cases, several
household members were interviewed in order to obtain a
complete list of known medicinal plants. Second, we used
onlythemostfrequentlyreportedplants,assumingthatthese
would be more widely known at the research sites. In fact,
according to Martin [67], people tend to list the most cultur-
ally important plants ﬁrst when asked to freelist. A limitation
of this measure is that it disregards the lesser known plants,
which can be interesting indicators of intracultural variation
and knowledge transmission. However, these and other
plants were taken into account for the comparison of the
amounts of ethnobotanical knowledge (number of plants
reported).Third,fortheclusteranalysis,weusedtheDiceco-
eﬃcient to produce the (dis)similarity matrix between pairs
of households. This coeﬃcient puts a comparatively strong
emphasis on the number of presence matches (number of
plantsknowntoeachpairofhouseholds).Thisisnotthecase
with other coeﬃcients, such as, for instance, the simple
matching coeﬃcient that was used by other researchers to
make similar cluster analyses [14].
A second methodological constraint of the present study
was the limited sample size. A considerable amount of time
was required to obtain qualitative data that provided in-
depth overall knowledge about the research context and
made it possible to establish relationships of trust with par-
ticipants and conduct long open-ended interviews and in-
formal exchanges. As a consequence, we collaborated with a
total of 36 households at the two study sites over a total of 22
months. The same number of households was interviewed at
each study site (18), in order to allow for comparison of the
medicinal plant inventories from both sites. A larger sample
size would be recommendable for a stronger statistical com-
parison of plant knowledge according to a set of diﬀering
socioeconomic variables.
Another aspect worth noting is the poor ﬁt of the cluster
analysis results from the Waca Playa case study. The correla-
tioncoeﬃcientfromtheclusteranalysistreefromWacaPlaya
was low (r = 0.64; poor ﬁt), which means that the degree
of correspondence of the analysis with the original data was
weak,whereastheonefromthePitumarcatreewashigh(r =
0.81; good ﬁt). Despite this, we included the results from
Waca Playa in the present paper in order to verify wheth-
er the trends identiﬁed in the data from Pitumarca were con-
ﬁrmed.ThedatausedinWacaPlayamight beconsideredtoo
limited to distinguish groups of clusters. The same analysis
was thus run with a higher number of plants using the data
sets from the two research sites (those mentioned by 17 and
those mentioned by all 18 participating households), but the
resulting correlation coeﬃcients were even lower. One possi-
ble explanation for the weak results in Waca Playa could be
the low agreement on medicinal plants among households,
not allowing for strong patterns to be discovered. Deﬁning
culture as consensus, in line with Romney et al. [68], could
oﬀer an explanation for these results. According to these au-
thors, participants who agree more with others are more
knowledgeable. This was conﬁrmed by our results, when
comparing overall knowledge from Pitumarca with that in
Waca Playa. In Pitumarca, where there was more agree-
ment among households about commonly known medicinal
plants, the total amount of medicinal plant knowledge was
also greater (total of 249 plants known versus 150 in Waca
Playa).Apositivecorrelationbetweenconsensusandmedici-
nalplantknowledgeatthegrouplevelwasalsodemonstrated
by Vandebroek [26] although this correlation was negative
at the individual level, namely, in the case of specialists who
showed a low level of agreement with their peers but a high
level of idiosyncratic knowledge.
A ﬁnal constraint of this study is that voucher specimens
of some plants could not be collected because of the study’s
time limitations, either because they grew far from the re-
search site and were not easily available during the ﬁeld work16 Evidence-Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine
season, or because the specimens collected were deteriorated
due to adverse climatic conditions. In these cases, the corre-
spondingplantscouldonlybedeterminedindirectlythrough
literature, which does not ensure the accuracy of this infor-
mation and thus limits its use for future comparative studies
with the same plants.
5. Conclusions
This study shows that LK in culturally homogeneous groups
presents certain patterns of variation and distribution that
result from diﬀerences at the socioeconomic and personal
levels, including individual life experiences. Our ﬁndings
demonstrate the usefulness of triangulating the results from
several methods to assess intracultural variation, namely, by
comparison of both the amount and type of ethnobotanical
knowledge. On the one hand, comparison of the average or
median number of plants mentioned per households did not
allow us to identify clear patterns in the distribution of me-
dicinal knowledge, but it provided clues about its resilience
by demonstrating that factors of social change such as
schooling, migration, or the market economy did not inﬂu-
ence it. On the other hand, cluster analysis permitted a dem-
onstration of the socioeconomic factors that explain more
detailed diﬀerences and similarities between the types of
knowledge in diﬀerent households. In addition, assessment
of the modes of transmission of medicinal plant knowledge
was a valuable tool for better understanding of the dynamics
of Andean LK. Future studies should investigate the transfor-
mations of the patterns of Andean environmental knowledge
distribution and transmission over time. Processes of social
change might indeed lead to a redeﬁnition of the weight of
the diﬀerent factors that inﬂuence LK and modes of knowl-
edge transmission. This kind of approach could provide
valuable insights into the degree of resilience of Andean LK
in a rapidly changing socioecological context.
Acknowledgments
The authors are very grateful to the participants from the
communities of Tres Cruces and Lambramani in Bolivia and
Huasapampa and Huito in Peru for sharing their time and
knowledge. AGRUCO in Cochabamba, CEPROSI in Cusco,
and ETC Andes in Lima provided invaluable logistic support
during ﬁeld work. Their warm thanks go to their respective
directors,FreddyDelgado,ElenaPardo,andTeobaldoPinz´ as.
The following persons assisted with interview interpretation
and/or translation: Martin Huam´ an, Sonia Medrano, Sandra
Acu˜ na, Roger Ju´ arez, Rolando S´ anchez, and Deicy Mej´ ıa.
Fructuosa De La Torre, director of the Herbarium Vargas
in Cusco, and Magaly Mercado, director of the Herbarium
MartinCardenasinCochabamba,areacknowledgedfortheir
support with plant identiﬁcation. Cecilia Gianella elaborated
the research sites map, and Ted Wachs did language editing.
They also wish to thank two anonymous reviewers for in-
teresting comments that helped improve this paper. This re-
search was conducted within the framework of the Swiss
National Centre of Competence in Research (NCCR) North-
South, cofunded by the Swiss National Science Foundation
(SNSF), the Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation
(SDC),andparticipatinginstitutions. SupportfromtheSDC
program “Jeunes Chercheurs,” managed by the Swiss Com-
mission for Research Partnerships with Developing Coun-
tries (KFPE), is also gratefully acknowledged. S. L. Mathez-
Stiefel wishes to thank Stephan Rist and Urs Wiesmann at
the Centre for Development and Environment (CDE) of the
University of Berne for supervising the research.
References
[1] F. Berkes, J. Colding, and C. Folke, “Rediscovery of traditional
ecologicalknowledgeasadaptivemanagement,”EcologicalAp-
plications, vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 1251–1262, 2000.
[2] F. Berkes, Sacred Ecology: Traditional Ecological Knowledge and
Resource Management, Taylor and Francis, Philadelphia, Pa,
USA, 1999.
[3] K. Ohmagari and F. Berkes, “Transmission of Indigenous
KnowledgeandBushSkillsamongtheWesternJamesBayCree
Women of Subarctic Canada,” Human Ecology, vol. 25, no. 2,
pp. 197–222, 1997.
[4] C. Eyssartier, A. H. Ladio, and M. Lozada, “Cultural trans-
mission of traditional knowledge in two populations of
North-western Patagonia,” Journal of Ethnobiology and Eth-
nomedicine, vol. 4, article no. 25, 2008.
[5] M.Lozada,A.Ladio,andM.Weigandt,“Culturaltransmission
of ethnobotanical knowledge in a rural community of North-
western Patagonia, Argentina,” Economic Botany, vol. 60, no.
4, pp. 374–385, 2006.
[6] F. S. Wyndham, “Traditional plant knowledge in community
contexts:ahumanecosystemperspective,”inEthnobiologyand
Biocultural Diversity, J. R. Stepp, F. S. Wyndham, and R. K.
Zarger, Eds., pp. 549–557, University of Georgia Press, Athens,
Greece, 2002.
[7] J. Ishizawa and G. Rengifo, “Biodiversity regeneration and
intercultural knowledge transmission in the Peruvian Andes,”
in Learning & Knowing in Indigenous Societies Today, P. Bates
et al., Ed., pp. 59–71, UNESCO, Paris, France, 2009.
[8] V. Reyes-Garc´ ıa, J. Broesch, L. Calvet-Mir et al., “Cultural
transmission of ethnobotanical knowledge and skills: an em-
pirical analysis from an Amerindian society,” Evolution and
Human Behavior, vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 274–285, 2009.
[9] S. Zent, “Traditional ecological knowledge (TEK) and biocul-
tural diversity: a close-up look at linkages, delearning trends,
and changing patterns of transmission,” in Learning & Know-
ing in Indigenous Societies Today, P. Bates et al., Ed., pp. 39–57,
UNESCO, Paris, France, 2009.
[10] L. L. Cavalli-Sforza and M. Feldman, Cultural Transmission
and Evolution: A Quantitative Approach, Princeton University
Press., Princeton, NJ, USA, 1981.
[11] B. S. Hewlett and L. L. Cavalli-Sforza, “Cultural transmission
among Aka pygmies,” American Anthropologist, vol. 88, no. 4,
pp. 922–934, 1986.
[12] J. J. Tehrani and M. Collard, “On the relationship between
interindividual cultural transmission and population-level
cultural diversity: a case study of weaving in Iranian tribal
populations,” Evolution and Human Behavior, vol. 30, no. 4,
pp. 286–e1, 2009.
[13] P.Giovanninietal.,“Dopharmaceuticalsdisplacelocalknowl-
edge and use of medicinal plants? Estimates from a cross-
sectional study in a rural indigenous community, Mexico,” So-
cial Science & Medicine, vol. 72, pp. 928–936, 2011.Evidence-Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine 17
[14] I. Vandebroek, M. J. Balick, A. Ososki et al., “The importance
of botellas and other plant mixtures in Dominican traditional
medicine,” Journal of Ethnopharmacology, vol. 128, no. 1, pp.
20–41, 2010.
[15] F. S. Wyndham, “Environments of learning: rar´ amuri chil-
dren’s plant knowledge and experience of schooling, family,
and landscapes in the Sierra Tarahumara, Mexico,” Human
Ecology, vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 87–99, 2010.
[16] M. B. Quinlan and R. J. Quinlan, “Modernization and medic-
inal plant knowledge in a Caribbean horticultural village,”
Medical Anthropology Quarterly, vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 169–192,
2007.
[17] B. Arias Toledo, L. Galleto, and S. Colantonio, “Uso de plantas
medicinales y alimenticias segun caracteristicas sociocultur-
ales en Villa Los Aromos (Cordoba, Argentina),” Kurtziana,
vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 79–88, 2007.
[18] S. Arango Caro, “Estudios etnobot´ anicos en los Andes Cen-
trales (Colombia): distribuci´ on del conocimiento del uso de
las plantas seg´ un caracter´ ısticas de los informantes,” Lyonia,
vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 90–104, 2007.
[19] F. Robinson, Distribution and Transmission of Traditional Bo-
tanical Knowledge in the Changing Social Environment: A Study
of a Kenyah-Dayak Community in Interior Borneo, in Depart-
ment of Anthropology, University of Kent at Canterburry, Can-
terburry, UK, 2003.
[20] A. Begossi, N. Hanazaki, and J. Y. Tamashiro, “Medicinal
plantsintheAtlanticForest(Brazil):Knowledge,use,andcon-
servation,” Human Ecology, vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 281–299, 2002.
[21] S. Zent, “Acculturation and ethnobotanical knowledge loss
among the Piaroa of Venezuela. Demonstration of a quantita-
tive method for the empirical study of traditional environ-
mental knowledge change,” in On Biocultural Diversity. Link-
ing Language, Knowledge, and the Environment,L .M a ﬃ, Ed.,
pp. 190–211, Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, DC,
USA, 2001.
[22] M.N.Alexiades,EthnobotanyoftheEseEja:Plants,Health,and
ChangeinanAmazonianSociety,inFacultyinBiology,TheCity
University of New York, New York, NY, USA, 1999.
[23] I. Caniago and S. F. Siebert, “Medicinal plant ecology, knowl-
edge and conservation in Kalimantan, Indonesia,” Economic
Botany, vol. 52, no. 3, pp. 229–250, 1998.
[24] L. C. Garro, “Intracultural variation in folk medical knowl-
edge: a comparison between curers and noncurers,” American
Anthropologist, vol. 88, no. 2, p. 351, 1986.
[25] J. S. Boster, “Exchange of varieties and information between
Aguaruna manioc cultivators,” American Anthropologist, vol.
88, no. 2, pp. 428–436, 1986.
[26] I.Vandebroek,“TheDualIntraculturalandInterculturalRela-
tionshipbetweenMedicinalPlantKnowledgeandConsensus,”
Economic Botany, vol. 64, no. 4, pp. 303–317, 2010.
[27] F. S. Wyndham, “Environments of learning: Rar´ amuri chil-
dren’s plant knowledge and experience of schooling, family,
and landscapes in the Sierra Tarahumara, Mexico,” Human
Ecology, vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 87–99, 2010.
[28] A. Berm´ udez, M. A. Oliveira-Miranda, and D. Vel´ azquez,
“Ethnobotanical research on medicinal plants: a review of its
goals and current approaches,” Interciencia,v o l .3 0 ,n o .8 ,p p .
453–515, 2005.
[29] J. S. Boster, “The information economy model applied to
biological similarity in judgment,” in Perspectives on Socially
SharedCognition,L.Resnick,J.Levine,andS.Teasley,Eds.,pp.
203–225, American Psychological Association, Washington,
DC, USA, 1991.
[30] V. Reyes-Garc´ ıa, E. Kightley, I. Ruiz-Mall´ en et al., “Schooling
and local environmental knowledge: do they complement or
substitute each other?” International Journal of Educational
Development, vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 305–313, 2010.
[31] S. Zent, “The quandary of conserving ethnoecological knowl-
edge: a Piaroa example,” in Ethnoecology: Knowledge, Resources
and Rights, T. L. Gragson and B. L. Blount, Eds., pp. 90–124,
University of Georgia Press, Athens, Greece, 1999.
[32] A. Pieroni and I. Vandebroek, “Introduction,” in Traveling
Cultures and Plants. The Ethnobiology and Ethnopharmacy of
Human Migrations,A .P i e r o n ia n dI .V a n d e b r o e k ,E d s . ,p p .1 –
13, Berghahn Books, New York, NY, USA, 2007.
[33] I. Nesheim, S. S. Dhillion, and K. A. Stølen, “What happens
to traditional knowledge and use of natural resources when
people migrate?” Human Ecology, vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 99–131,
2006.
[34] J. Alcorn, “Indigenous resource management systems,” in
Cultural and Spiritual Values of Biodiversity,D .A .P o s e y ,E d . ,
pp. 203–206, Intermediate Technology Publications, London,
UK, 1999.
[35] S. Wongbusarakum, “Loss of traditional practices, loss of
knowledge, and the sustainability of cultural and natural re-
sources: a case of Urk Lawoi people in the Adong Archipelago,
Southwest Thailand,” in Learning & Knowing in Indigenous
Societies Today, P. Bates et al., Ed., pp. 73–85, UNESCO, Paris,
France, 2009.
[36] V. Reyes-Garc´ ıa, V. Vadez, E. Byron et al., “Market economy
and the loss of folk knowledge of plant uses: estimates from
the Tsimane’ of the Bolivian Amazon,” Current Anthropology,
vol. 46, no. 4, pp. 651–656, 2005.
[37] AGRUCO, EcoCiencia, and ETCAndes, Programa regional
BioAndes. Propuesta t´ ecnica y ﬁnanciera puesta a consid-
eraci´ on de: Agencia Suiza para el Desarrollo y la Cooperaci´ on
COSUDE, 2005.
[38] E. Pardo Castillo and R. Achahui Quenti, “Redescubriendo las
ra´ ıces culturales: los ni˜ nos y la biodiversidad en los Andes,”
LEISA Revista de Agroecolog´ ıa, vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 34–37, 2004.
[39] F. Apﬀel-Marglin and PRATEC, The Spirit of Regeneration.
Andean Culture Confronting Western Notions of Development,
Zed Books, New York, NY, USA, 1998.
[40] AGRUCO, ETCAndes, and EcoCiencia, Revalorizaci´ on y con-
servaci´ on de la diversidad biocultural andina: Experiencias y
aprendizajes del programa regional BioAndes, Cochabamba,
AGRUCO, 2011.
[41] M. Galvin, “La connaissance m´ etisse. Une analyse de la pol-
itique de protection des connaissances traditionnelles au
P´ erou,” in IUED, p. 409, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switz-
erland, 2004.
[42] J. J. Alba Fernandez, EntrelaPervivenciaylaMuerte:LosCam-
po Jampiris de Campero. Estudio Diagnostico de Los Recursos
Tradicionales de Salud en las Comunidades Quechuas de la
Provincia Campero, Editora El Pais, Santa Cruz, Bolivia, 1996.
[43] M. A. Salas, “The technicians only believe in science and
cannot read the sky: the cultural dimension of the knowledge
conﬂict in the Andes,” in Beyond Farmer First: Rural People’s
Knowledge, Agricultural Research and Extension Practice,I .
ScoonesandJ.Thompson,Eds.,pp.57–69,IntermediateTech-
nology Publications, London, UK, 1994.
[44] M. Ceuterick, I. Vandebroek, and A. Pieroni, “Resilience of
Andean urban ethnobotanies: a comparison of medicinal
plantuseamongBolivianandPeruvianmigrantsintheUnited
Kingdom and in their countries of origin,” Journal of Ethno-
pharmacology, vol. 136, no. 1, pp. 27–54, 2011.18 Evidence-Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine
[45] INC, Diagnostico Situacional y Socioecon´ omico del Distrito de
Pitumarca–Canchis, INC, Cusco, Peru, 2008.
[46] ETCAndes, “Informe del diagn´ ostico participativo comuni-
tariodelaszonasbioculturalesseleccionadasparaelPer´ u:Dis-
trito de Pitumarca, Provincia de Canchis, Cusco,” ETC Andes-
BioAndes, Lima, Peru, 2006.
[47] J. Delgadillo, “La ﬂora nativa en la vida de las comunida-
des campesinas de los Andes. Caso comunidad Tres Cruces,
Cochabamba-Bolivia,” Universidad Internacional de Andal-
uc´ ıa, Spain, 2004.
[48] D. M. Olson, E. Dinerstein, E. D. Wikramanayake et al.,
“Terrestrial ecoregions of the world: a new map of life on
Earth,” BioScience, vol. 51, no. 11, pp. 933–938, 2001.
[49] I. Vandebroek, E. Thomas, and AMETRAC, Plantas medici-
nales para la atenci´ on primaria de la salud. El conocimiento
de ocho m´ edicos tradicionales de Apillapampa (Bolivia),
Ind´ ustrias Gr´ aﬁcas Serrano, Cochabamba, Bolivia, 2003.
[50] C. Roersch, Plantas Medicinales en el Sur Andino del Per´ u,
Koeltz Scientiﬁc Books, Koenigstein, Germany, 1994.
[51] IPNI,TheInternationalPlantNamesIndex,2011,http://www.
ipni.org/.
[52] Missouri Botanical Garden, 2011, http://www.tropicos.org/.
[53] D. Estomba, A. Ladio, and M. Lozada, “Medicinal wild plant
knowledge and gathering patterns in a Mapuche community
from North-western Patagonia,” Journal of Ethnopharmacol-
ogy, vol. 103, no. 1, pp. 109–119, 2006.
[54] A. H. Ladio and M. Lozada, “Comparison of wild edible plant
diversity and foraging strategies in two aboriginal communi-
ties of northwestern Patagonia,” Biodiversity and Conservation,
vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 937–951, 2003.
[55] R. A. Voeks and A. Leony, “Forgetting the forest: assessing
medicinal plant erosion in eastern Brazil,” Economic Botany,
vol. 58, pp. S294–S306, 2004.
[56] O.PhillipsandA.H.Gentry,“TheusefulplantsofTambopata,
Peru: II. Additional hypothesis testing in quantitative ethnob-
otany,” Economic Botany, vol. 47, no. 1, pp. 33–43, 1993.
[57] R.A.Voeks,“Arewomenreservoirsoftraditionalplantknowl-
edge? Gender, ethnobotany and globalization in northeast
Brazil,” Singapore Journal of Tropical Geography, vol. 28, no.
1, pp. 7–20, 2007.
[58] J. D. Van der Ploeg, “Potatoes and knowledge,” in An Anthro-
pological Critique of Development: The Growth of Ignorance,,
M. Hobart, Ed., pp. 209–227, Routledge, London, UK, 1993.
[59] J. W. Bastien, “Exchange between Andean and Western
medicine,” Social Science and Medicine, vol. 16, no. 7, pp. 795–
803, 1982.
[60] I. Vandebroek, P. Van Damme, L. Van Puyvelde, S. Arrazola,
and N. De Kimpe, “A comparison of traditional healers’ me-
dicinal plant knowledge in the Bolivian Andes and Amazon,”
Social Science and Medicine, vol. 59, no. 4, pp. 837–849, 2004.
[61] N. Long and M. Villareal, “The interweaving of knowledge
and power in development interfaces,” in Beyond Farmer First:
Rural People’s Knowledge, Agricultural Research and Extension
Practice,I .S c o o n e sa n dJ .T h o m p s o n ,E d s . ,p p .4 1 – 5 2 ,I n t e r -
mediate Technology Publications, London, UK, 1994.
[62] T.Ingold,“Theoptimalforagerandeconomicman,”inNature
and Society: Anthropological Perspectives, P. Descola and P.
G´ ısli, Eds., pp. 25–44, Routledge, London, UK, 1996.
[63] R. McElreath and P. Strimling, “When natural selection favors
imitation of parents,” Current Anthropology, vol. 49, no. 2, pp.
307–316, 2008.
[64] L.Barsh,“Indigenousknowledgeandbiodiversity,”inCultural
andSpiritualValuesofBiodiversity,D.A.Posey,Ed.,pp.73–76,
Intermediate Technology Publications, London, UK, 1999.
[65] M. Quinlan, “Considerations for collecting freelists in the
ﬁeld: examples from ethnobotany,” Field Methods, vol. 17, no.
3, pp. 219–234, 2005.
[66] P. M. Medeiros et al., “The role of visual stimuli in ethnobo-
tanical studies,” in Current Topics in Ethnobotany,U .P .A l -
buquerque and M. A. Ramos, Eds., pp. 125–137, Research
Signposts, Kerala, India, 2008.
[67] G. G. Martin, Ethnobotany. A Methods Manual, Chapman &
Hall, London, UK, 1995.
[ 6 8 ]A .K .R o m n e y ,S .C .W e l l e r ,a n dW .H .B a t c h e l d e r ,“ C u l t u r e
as consensus: a theory of culture and informant accuracy,”
American Anthropologist, vol. 88, no. 2, pp. 313–338, 1986.