Boise State UniversityScholarWorksBiology Faculty Publications and Presentations Department of Biological Sciences2-1-2013Phytochemistry Predicts Habitat Selection by anAvian Herbivore at Multiple Spatial ScalesGraham G. FryeBoise State UniversityJohn W. ConnellyIdaho Department of Fish and GameDavid D. MusilIdaho Department of Fish and GameJennifer S. ForbeyBoise State UniversityThis document was originally published by Ecological Society of America in Ecology. Copyright restrictions may apply. DOI: 10.1890/12-1313.1Ecology, 94(2), 2013, pp. 308–314 2013 by the Ecological Society of AmericaPhytochemistry predicts habitat selection by an avian herbivoreat multiple spatial scalesGRAHAM G. FRYE,1,4 JOHN W. CONNELLY,2 DAVID D. MUSIL,3 AND JENNIFER S. FORBEY11Department of Biological Sciences, Boise State University, Boise, Idaho 83725 USA2Idaho Department of Fish and Game, Blackfoot, Idaho 83221 USA3Idaho Department of Fish and Game, Jerome, Idaho 83338 USAAbstract. Animal habitat selection is a process that functions at multiple, hierarchicallystructured spatial scales. Thus multi-scale analyses should be the basis for inferences aboutfactors driving the habitat selection process. Vertebrate herbivores forage selectively on thebasis of phytochemistry, but few studies have investigated the inﬂuence of selective foraging(i.e., ﬁne-scale habitat selection) on habitat selection at larger scales. We tested the hypothesisthat phytochemistry is integral to the habitat selection process for vertebrate herbivores. Wepredicted that habitats selected at three spatial scales would be characterized by highernutrient concentrations and lower concentrations of plant secondary metabolites (PSMs) thanunused habitats. We used the Greater Sage-Grouse (Centrocercus urophasianus), an avianherbivore with a seasonally specialized diet of sagebrush, to test our hypothesis. Sage-Grouseselected a habitat type (black sagebrush, Artemisia nova) with lower PSM concentrations thanthe alternative (Wyoming big sagebrush, A. tridentata wyomingensis). Within black sagebrushhabitat, Sage-Grouse selected patches and individual plants within those patches that werehigher in nutrient concentrations and lower in PSM concentrations than those not used. Ourresults provide the ﬁrst evidence for multi-scale habitat selection by an avian herbivore on thebasis of phytochemistry, and they suggest that phytochemistry may be a fundamental driver ofhabitat selection for vertebrate herbivores.Key words: Artemisia spp.; Centrocercus urophasianus; Greater Sage-Grouse; habitat selection;herbivory; monoterpenes; plant secondary metabolites; sagebrush; selective foraging; south-central Idaho,USA; spatial scale.INTRODUCTIONEcological processes function simultaneously withinmultiple, hierarchically structured spatial scales (Wiens1989). Consequently, inferences about the factors thatinﬂuence ecological pattern and process are conditionalon the spatial scale under investigation (Kristan 2006).Coarse-scale studies may indicate the importance of aparticular set of factors, whereas ﬁne-scale studies mayindicate inﬂuences of an entirely different set of factors(Wiens et al. 1986). Thus, a holistic understanding ofecological pattern and process requires informationfrom multiple scales. Animal habitat selection is anecological process that occurs at multiple scales (John-son 1980). Coarse-scale measurements may yield infer-ences about habitat selection that differ from thosemade at a ﬁne scale within the same system (e.g., Beckerand Beissinger 2003). Although patterns of habitatselection at a single scale are often important, patternsobserved consistently at multiple scales may providemore robust inferences about factors fundamentallydriving the habitat selection process.Vertebrate herbivores have been the focus of anincreasing number of multi-scale habitat selectionstudies (e.g., Moore et al. 2010, Rearden et al. 2011),which have yielded insights that may have been lackingfrom single-scale investigations. However, few studieshave directly considered the role of diet in habitatselection by herbivores, despite the importance of foodquality to individual ﬁtness (DeGabriel et al. 2009).Herbivore diets are constrained by the nutritional anddefensive chemistry of plants (Marsh et al. 2005).Although typically abundant, plants are relatively lowin nutrients (White 1978) and often contain defensivecompounds (i.e., plant secondary metabolites, PSMs;Dearing et al. 2005). This combination places conﬂictingpressures on herbivores to maximize consumption ofone plant constituent (i.e., nutrients), while simulta-neously minimizing consumption of another (i.e., PSMs;Dearing et al. 2005). These conﬂicting pressures mayshape the evolution of selective foraging strategies(Bryant and Kuropat 1980), which may then inﬂuencethe process of herbivore habitat selection (Moore et al.2010).We tested the hypothesis that the defensive andnutritional chemistry of plants fundamentally inﬂuencesManuscript received 26 July 2012; accepted 5 October 2012.Corresponding Editor (ad hoc): W. Wetzel.4 Present address: Department of Biology and Wildlife,University of Alaska, Faribanks, Alaska 99775-7000 USA.E-mail: ggfrye@rmf-inh.org308Reportshabitat selection by vertebrate herbivores. We predictedthat habitats selected at multiple scales would becharacterized by high-nutrient and low-PSM plants.We used an avian herbivore with a seasonally specializeddiet of high-PSM plants to test our hypothesis. TheGreater Sage-Grouse (Centrocercus urophasianus; here-after Sage-Grouse) is an herbivorous tetraonine with aspecialized diet of sagebrush (Artemisia spp.) leavesfrom late autumn through early spring (Wallestad et al.1975). Sagebrush foliage contains relatively high con-centrations of PSMs (e.g., monoterpenes, sesquiterpenelactones, phenolics; Kelsey et al. 1982) and previouswork has suggested that Sage-Grouse browse sagebrushselectively with respect to nutrients and PSMs (Rem-ington and Braun 1985, Welch et al. 1988). We evaluatedthe effects of nutrients and PSMs on Sage-Grousehabitat selection at three spatial scales: (1) selection ofsagebrush habitat type, (2) selection of patches within agiven habitat type, and (3) selection of plants within agiven patch (i.e., diet selection). Here, we provide theﬁrst evidence for multi-scale habitat selection by anavian herbivore on the basis of phytochemistry.METHODSStudy siteWe conducted this study during the winter of 2010–2011 with a Sage-Grouse–sagebrush system in a;19 000ha area of south-central Idaho, USA (428110 N, 1148460W). The study area was between 10 and 316 times thesize of reported Sage-Grouse winter home ranges,depending on the individual bird and home rangeestimation method (Schroeder et al. 1999). Dominantvegetation at the study site was a mosaic of blacksagebrush (Artemisia nova) and Wyoming big sagebrush(A. tridentata wyomingensis) stands with a mixture ofnative grasses, exotic grasses, and herbaceous vegetationin the understory. Elevations ranged from approximate-ly 1550 m to 1750 m and average annual precipitationwas 26.3 cm. Winter high temperatures averaged 4.68Cand winter low temperatures averaged 5.98C. Maxi-mum snow depth observed during the study was 7.5 cm,but snow cover was absent during the majority of thestudy period.Field methodsWe marked 38 Sage-Grouse with ;17 g necklace-styleVHF radio transmitters during 2010 and 2011. Duringeach of three winter sampling periods (23–30 January2011, 6–13 February 2011, and 8–14 March 2011), weused radiotelemetry to locate randomly selected Sage-Grouse ﬂocks containing radio-marked birds duringdaylight. Radio-marked grouse were located one tothree times each during the study, but individuals werenever located repeatedly within the same samplingperiod. We collected samples of browsed and non-browsed sagebrush plants at each ﬂock location(hereafter, ‘‘used patch’’). Browsed plants were deﬁnedas those with evidence of at least 10 fresh Sage-Grousebite marks (Appendix A: Fig. A1). Non-browsed plantswere deﬁned as plants with (1) no evidence of Sage-Grouse browsing and (2) evidence of Sage-Grousepresence (tracks, droppings, and browsed plants) within0.5 m of the plant. At each used patch (n¼ 55), clippingsfrom three browsed and three non-browsed plants werecollected and pooled to form a single browsed sampleand a single non-browsed sample. Additionally, wegenerated random coordinates (n ¼ 55) constrained bythe boundaries of the study area. At each set of randomcoordinates (hereafter, ‘‘random patches’’), we collectedclippings from the three closest sagebrush plants andpooled them into a single sample. We did not observeevidence of Sage-Grouse presence (e.g., browsed sage-brush, fecal droppings, tracks) at random patches. Allsamples collected within a given used or random patchwere conspeciﬁc with one another and with thedominant sagebrush taxon (Wyoming big sagebrush orblack sagebrush). Structural vegetation measurementscan affect Sage-Grouse habitat use (Connelly et al. 2000,Hagen et al. 2007), so we measured shrub canopy cover(Wambolt et al. 2006) and height along two perpendic-ular 30-m transects at each used and random patch toaccount for this effect.Laboratory methodsWe stored sagebrush samples in a 208C freezer,ground the leaves in liquid nitrogen using a mortar andpestle, and divided each sample into three subsamples.The ﬁrst subsample was used to quantify individualmonoterpenes via headspace gas chromatography (Ap-pendix B). We identiﬁed individual monoterpenes usingco-chromatography with known standards. The secondsubsample was used in a colorimetric assay to quantifytotal phenolic concentrations (Appendix C). The thirdsubsample was dried and shipped to Dairy One ForageLaboratory (Ithaca, New York, USA) for analysis ofcrude protein content.We used crude protein as a nutrient variable becauseit can affect herbivore foraging behavior and reproduc-tive success (Mattson 1980). Nutrient concentrationswere quantiﬁed as percentage of dry mass. We chosemonoterpenes and phenolics as PSM variables becauseboth classes of compounds exert deleterious effects (e.g.,toxicity, increased energy expenditure, nutrient binding)on herbivores (Dearing et al. 2005) and occur inrelatively high concentrations in sagebrush (Kelsey etal. 1982). Monoterpenes were quantiﬁed as area underthe gas chromatogram curve/100 lg dry mass (AUC/100lg; Appendix B), and total phenolic concentrations werequantiﬁed as lmol gallic acid equivalents/g dry mass(Appendix C).Statistical analysisPrior to ﬁtting models, we used Fisher’s exact test toexamine our a priori belief that Sage-Grouse used blacksagebrush habitat more than expected on the basis ofavailability. Starting with one nutrient covariate (crudeFebruary 2013 309PHYTOCHEMISTRY AND HABITAT SELECTIONReportsprotein), seven PSM covariates (Appendix B: Table B1),and two structural covariates (shrub height, shrubcanopy cover), we removed collinear variables (jrj .0.7, variance inﬂation factors .3.0) and ﬁt binary logitmodels separately at each of three spatial scales. Toidentify factors associated with selection of habitat type,we treated habitat type (Wyoming big sagebrush orblack sagebrush) at random patches as a binary responseand the nutrient, PSM, and structural covariates ascontinuous predictors. To assess selection of patcheswithin a given habitat type, we treated patch type (usedor random) as a binary response and the nutrient, PSM,and structural covariates as continuous predictors.Covariate values for used patches were the means ofall sagebrush samples (browsed and non-browsed)collected therein. To assess selection of plants within agiven patch (i.e., diet selection), we treated plant type(browsed or non-browsed) as a binary response and thenutrient and PSM covariates as continuous predictors.For the analysis of plant selection, we used conditionallogit models to control for variation among patches(Compton et al. 2002).We used a hierarchical information-theoretic ap-proach to model selection and model averaging (Burn-ham and Anderson 2002, sensu Doherty et al. 2008)within each spatial scale. First, we identiﬁed thevariables that best represented each of the threepredictor categories (nutrient, PSM, structure) bycomparing Akaike’s Information Criterion values withsample size bias adjustment (AICc) for all variablecombinations within each category (Appendix D: TablesD2–D4). Within the PSM category, we included totalmonoterpene concentration for comparison with indi-vidual monoterpene covariates, but restricted it to asingle-predictor model because of its lack of indepen-dence with individual monoterpene covariates. Covari-ates from the top models in each predictor category werethen included in a ﬁnal round of model selection unlessthey were ranked below the null (intercept-only) model(Appendix D: Table D1). We weighted ﬁnal modelswithin 2 AICc units of the top model (i.e., DAICc  2)by Akaike model weight (wi ) to derive model-averagedparameter estimates, and we used unconditional vari-ance for estimating 95% conﬁdence intervals (Burnhamand Anderson 2002). To evaluate model performance,we used 10-fold cross validation to estimate classiﬁca-tion accuracy for the top model at each spatial scale.Statistical analyses were conducted in R version 2.14 (RDevelopment Core Team 2011) and SAS version 9.2(SAS Institute 2008).To screen for cross-scale correlations between spatialscales, we computed bivariate correlation coefﬁcientsbetween scales for all covariates that appeared in topmodels. We considered jrj . 0.7 as indicative ofsigniﬁcant cross-scale correlation. Additionally, weplotted mean values partitioned by sample category(browsed, non-browsed, random) for covariates sharedamong top models at the patch and plant scales. Becausethe covariate values representing the phytochemistry ofa given patch were composites of the values of browsedand non-browsed plants within that patch, we expectedto see similar values for random and non-browsedsamples (i.e., the sample categories not selected by Sage-Grouse at the patch and plant scales, respectively) if ourpatch-scale inferences were artifacts of plant-scaleselection.RESULTSSelection of habitat typeSage-Grouse used black sagebrush habitat more thanexpected on the basis of availability (Fisher’s exact test:P , 0.0001, odds ratio ¼ 27.8; Appendix E: Table E1).The single habitat-type model with DAICc  2 includedone nutrient covariate (crude protein), one PSMcovariate (total monoterpene concentration), and onestructural covariate (shrub height; Appendix D: TableD2), with an estimated classiﬁcation accuracy of 94%.Wyoming big sagebrush contained higher total mono-terpene concentrations than black sagebrush (Table 1,Fig. 1). Additionally, Wyoming big sagebrush wascharacterized by higher crude protein and greater shrubheight than black sagebrush (Table 1, Fig. 1). Thisheight difference was the only difference in shrubstructure observed at any spatial scale during the study.Selection of patchesThe two ﬁnal patch-scale models with DAICc  2contained one nutrient covariate (crude protein) andtwo PSM covariates (unknown #1, 1,8-cineole; Appen-dix D: Table D3). However, the odds ratio estimate for1,8-cineole differed only slightly from 1 (i.e., logitTABLE 1. Model-averaged odds ratio estimates and 95%conﬁdence limits for covariates in ﬁnal Sage-Grouse habi-tat-selection models at each of three spatial scales, south-central Idaho, USA.Scale and covariateOddsratio95% CLLower UpperHabitat typeCrude protein (%) 0.37 0.10 0.83Total monoterpenes (AUC/100 lg) 0.89 0.79 0.98Shrub height (cm) 0.82 0.67 0.91PatchCrude protein (%) 1.69 1.12 2.55Unknown #1 (AUC/100 lg) 0.60 0.37 0.961,8-cineole (AUC/100 lg) 1.04 0.90 1.20PlantCrude protein (%) 2.02 1.03 3.981,8-cineole (AUC/100 lg) 0.82 0.70 0.97a-pinene (AUC/100 lg) 0.88 0.75 1.03Unknown #1 (AUC/100 lg) 0.84 0.66 1.08Notes:At the habitat scale, the response is the log odds that ahabitat is black sagebrush. At the patch scale, the response isthe log odds that a patch within black sagebrush habitat is used.At the plant scale, the response is the log odds that a plantwithin a used patch is browsed.GRAHAM G. FRYE ET AL.310 Ecology, Vol. 94, No. 2Reportscoefﬁcient ’ 0), with a broad conﬁdence interval thatsubstantially overlapped 1 (Table 1). Thus, we conclud-ed that 1,8-cineole lacked inferential value and excludedit from further consideration at the patch scale. Theestimated classiﬁcation accuracy for the top model was78%. The odds of patch use increased by 69% for each1% increase in crude protein, whereas the odds of patchuse decreased by 40% for each 1 AUC/100 lg increase inan unidentiﬁed monoterpene (unknown #1; Table 1, Fig.2A).Selection of plantsThe four ﬁnal plant-scale models with DAICc  2contained one nutrient covariate (crude protein) andthree PSM covariates (unknown #1, a-pinene, 1,8-cineole; Appendix D: Table D4). Odds ratio estimatesFIG. 1. Univariate comparisons (mean and 95% conﬁdence interval) of total monoterpene concentration (AUC/100 lg drymass), crude protein (%), and shrub height (cm) for black sagebrush (Artemisia nova) and Wyoming big sagebrush (A. tridentatawyomingensis) habitats during winter in south-central Idaho, USA. AUC refers to area under the gas chromatogram curve.FIG. 2. Response surface depicting the additive effects of increasing plant secondary metabolites (PSM) and nutrientconcentrations on the odds of Greater Sage-Grouse (Centrocercus urophasianus) use of (A) patches and (B) plants during winter inblack sagebrush (Artemisia nova) habitat, south-central Idaho, USA. Changes in the odds of use were calculated using the topcovariates within each spatial scale while holding all other covariates constant.February 2013 311PHYTOCHEMISTRY AND HABITAT SELECTIONReportswere less precise for unknown #1 and a-pinene than for1,8-cineole, as indicated by 95% conﬁdence intervalsslightly overlapping 1 (Table 1). The estimated classiﬁ-cation accuracy for the top model was 80%. The odds ofplant use increased by 102% for each 1% increase incrude protein, whereas the odds of plant use decreasedby 18% for each 1 AUC/100 lg increase in 1,8-cineole(Table 1, Fig. 2B).Cross-scale correlationBivariate correlation coefﬁcients did not indicate thepresence of cross-scale correlations (jrj , 0.7). Similarly,no relationship was evident (jrj , 0.7) between thecumulative PSM values, found to be important at thehabitat-type scale, and top covariates at the plant andpatch scales. Plots of means partitioned by samplecategory for covariates shared among top models at thepatch and plant scales (crude protein, unknown #1)indicated that non-browsed samples were intermediatein value relative to browsed and random samples (Fig. 3)DISCUSSIONResults were largely consistent with our predictionthat selected habitats would be characterized by highnutrient and low PSM concentrations. The sole excep-tion occurred at the habitat-type scale, where nutrientconcentrations were lower in the selected habitat type(black sagebrush). PSM differences at that scale mayhave been sufﬁciently extreme to negate the inﬂuence ofnutrients on habitat selection. Total monoterpeneconcentrations were 32% higher in Wyoming bigsagebrush than in black sagebrush, whereas crudeprotein concentrations were only 10% higher (Fig. 1),suggesting that the increase in toxic consequences fromhigh PSM concentrations in Wyoming big sagebrushmay have outweighed the increase in nutritional beneﬁt.Additionally, black sagebrush habitat was substantiallylower in height than Wyoming big sagebrush habitat(Fig. 1), and the former may thus have provided lowerquality thermal or escape cover. Again, the beneﬁt ofsubstantially lower PSMs in black sagebrush habitatmay have outweighed any costs of increased thermal orpredation risk. Alternatively, habitats characterized bylower shrub heights may have provided structuralbeneﬁts for Sage-Grouse (e.g., increased ability to detectpredators). Selection of low-height sagebrush habitatover sagebrush with greater cover potential has beenobserved in previous Sage-Grouse studies as well(Hagen et al. 2011), but associated phytochemistry hasnot been reported previously.Habitat selection at the patch and plant scales wasconsistent with our prediction. Patches selected withinblack sagebrush habitat had higher nutrient concentra-tions and lower concentrations of individual PSMs(Table 1, Fig. 2). This suggests that use of patches bySage-Grouse within a selected habitat type is nonuni-form and is inﬂuenced by nutrients and PSMs. Unlikethe habitat-type scale, however, total monoterpeneconcentrations within black sagebrush habitat did notdiffer between used (65.3 6 1.88 AUC/100 lg, mean 6SE) and random (62.2 6 2.06 AUC/100 lg) patches.This is consistent with observations that sagebrush PSMproﬁles are more similar within taxa than among taxa(Kelsey et al. 1982). Our results suggest that concentra-tions of individual monoterpenes, rather than cumula-tive monoterpenes, inﬂuence patch selection within ahabitat type. In other words, Sage-Grouse selected forthe general PSM proﬁle of black sagebrush (habitat-typeselection), and then selected for more speciﬁc nutrientand PSM differences within that general proﬁle (patchselection).Similarly, individual plants selected within a givenpatch were higher in nutrient concentrations and lowerin individual PSM concentrations. This suggests ﬁne-scale habitat selection in which the use of plants within apatch is nonuniform and is inﬂuenced by nutrient andPSM characteristics. As with patch selection, totalmonoterpene concentrations were similar betweenbrowsed (63.7 6 2.1 AUC/100 lg, mean 6 SE) andnon-browsed (66.9 6 2.4 AUC/100 lg) plants, butindividual monoterpene concentrations, in concert withnutrients, appeared to affect plant selection.An important consideration in multi-scale habitatselection studies is cross-scale correlation (Kristan2006). Cross-scale correlations can yield inferences atone spatial scale that are actually attributable to effectsat a different scale. Although bivariate correlations didFIG. 3. Values (mean 6 SE) partitioned by sample category(browsed, non-browsed, random) for nutrient (crude protein)and plant secondary metabolite (PSM unknown #1) covariatesoccurring in top models in both patch-scale and plant-scaleanalyses of Greater Sage-Grouse (Centrocercus urophasianus)winter habitat selection in south-central Idaho, USA. Interme-diate values for samples in the non-browsed category suggestthat observed patch-selection patterns were not artifacts ofplant-scale effects.GRAHAM G. FRYE ET AL.312 Ecology, Vol. 94, No. 2Reportsnot indicate substantial cross-scale correlations, it islikely that inferences made at each spatial scale in ourstudy lacked complete independence because we focusedon the same phytochemical characteristics at all scales.In particular, because the patch effect was partially afunction of plant-scale chemistry, patch-scale parameterestimates may simply have been an artifact of plant-scaleeffects for the covariates deemed important at bothscales (crude protein, unknown #1). However, the factthat non-browsed samples were intermediate in bothcrude protein and unknown #1 relative to browsed andrandom samples (Fig. 3) suggests that selection wasoccurring for higher nutrients and lower PSMs at bothspatial scales, and that patch-scale effects were notartifacts of cross-scale correlation. Similarly, the lack ofsubstantial correlation between top covariates at thehabitat-type scale and those at the smaller scalessuggests that selection of habitat type was not solelyan artifact of patch or plant selection.These habitat-use patterns suggest that Sage-Grousehierarchically selected habitat on the basis of multi-scaleheterogeneity in phytochemistry. Within a landscape,Sage-Grouse selected a habitat type (coarse-scaleselection) with substantially lower cumulative PSMconcentrations than the alternative, despite lowernutrient concentrations and lower vegetation height.Within that habitat type, cumulative PSM concentra-tions did not vary, but Sage-Grouse selected patches(meso-scale selection) with higher nutrient concentra-tions and lower individual PSM concentrations. Withinthose patches, Sage-Grouse selected individual plants(ﬁne-scale selection) with higher nutrient concentrationsand lower concentrations of individual PSMs.Multi-scale habitat selection by a vertebrate herbivoreon the basis of phytochemistry has previously beendocumented only in marsupials within fenced reserves(Moore et al. 2010). Moore et al. (2010) found thatkoalas (Phascolarctos cinereus) in a fenced reserve weremore likely to use patches with higher concentrations ofcrude protein and less likely to use patches with higherconcentrations of a group of phenolic PSMs. Thesenutrient and PSM characteristics were also associatedwith koala use of individual trees within those patches(Moore et al. 2010). Our results were consistent withthose of Moore et al. (2010) and provide the ﬁrstevidence for hierarchical habitat selection on the basis ofphytochemistry by a vertebrate herbivore outside offenced reserves. Moreover, we documented habitatselection at a third scale (habitat type) that was notconsidered in previous studies, and provide the ﬁrstevidence for the inﬂuence of phytochemistry on coarse-scale and meso-scale habitat selection by an avianherbivore.We recommend that investigators routinely considerthe functional importance of phytochemistry to avoidincomplete or inaccurate inferences in studies ofherbivore habitat selection. This is particularly impor-tant for systems in which herbivores specialize on high-PSM plants, as dietary constraints that limit use oflandscapes may exacerbate the impacts of anthropogenichabitat changes. Specialist herbivore species that havesuffered signiﬁcant declines in abundance and availablehabitat, such as Sage-Grouse (Garton et al. 2011), maybe particularly susceptible to environmental changesthat decrease nutrient availability or increase PSMs(Lawler et al. 1997), and warrant prioritization forfuture research and conservation efforts.ACKNOWLEDGMENTSWe are grateful to L. Cross, T. Ritter, K. Woras, K.Gehlken, S. Agofanov, B. Robb, A. Ullapa, X. Pu, D. Kashin,R. Lott, and R. Lowell for assistance with ﬁeld and laboratorywork. J. R. Belthoff, J. P. Bryant, and an anonymous reviewerprovided helpful comments and criticism on the manu-script. R. G. Kelsey provided consultation on the identiﬁcationof secondary compounds. J. A. Heath provided valuablehydrological insight. The Idaho Department of Fish and Game,Idaho Governor’s Ofﬁce for Species Conservation, Bureau ofLand Management (grant #LO9AC16253 to J. S. Forbey),Boise State University, Wilson Ornithological Society, and NSFIdaho EPSCoR grant #EPS-0814387 funded this research. Allwork was conducted under Boise State University IACUCprotocol #006-AC11-003. This is a contribution from IdahoFederal Aid in Wildlife Restoration Project W-160-R.LITERATURE CITEDBecker, B. H., and S. R. Beissinger. 2003. Scale-dependenthabitat selection by a nearshore seabird, the marbledmurrelet, in a highly dynamic upwelling system. MarineEcology Progress Series 256:243–255.Bryant, J. P., and P. J. Kuropat. 1980. Selection of winterforage by subarctic browsing vertebrates: the role of plantchemistry. Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics11:261–285.Burnham, K. P., and D. R. Anderson. 2002. Model selectionand multimodel inference: a practical information-theoreticapproach. Springer-Verlag, New York, New York, USA.Compton, B. W., J. M. Rhymer, and M. McCollough. 2002.Habitat selection by wood turtles (Clemmys insculpta): anapplication of paired logistic regression. Ecology 83:833–843.Connelly, J. W., M. A. Schroeder, A. R. Sands, and C. E.Braun. 2000. Guidelines to manage sage grouse populationsand their habitats. Wildlife Society Bulletin 28:967–985.Dearing, M. D., W. J. Foley, and S. McLean. 2005. Theinﬂuence of plant secondary metabolites on the nutritionalecology of herbivorous terrestrial vertebrates. Annual Re-view of Ecology, Evolution, and Systematics 36:169–189.DeGabriel, J. L., B. D. Moore, W. J. Foley, and C. N. Johnson.2009. The effects of plant defensive chemistry on nutrientavailability predict reproductive success in a mammal.Ecology 90:711–719.Doherty, K. E., D. E. Naugle, B. L. Walker, and J. M. Graham.2008. Greater sage-grouse winter habitat selection and energydevelopment. Journal of Wildlife Management 72:187–195.Garton, E. O., J. W. Connelly, J. S. Horne, C. A. Hagan, A.Moser, and M. A. Schroeder. 2011. Greater sage-grousepopulation dynamics and probability of persistence. Pages293–381 in S. T. Knick and J. W. Connelly, editors. Greatersage-grouse: ecology and conservation of a landscape speciesand its habitats. University of California Press, Berkeley,California, USA.Hagen, C. A., J. W. Connelly, and M. A. Schroeder. 2007. Ameta-analysis of greater sage-grouse Centrocercus urophasia-nus nesting and brood rearing habitats. Wildlife Biology13:42–50.February 2013 313PHYTOCHEMISTRY AND HABITAT SELECTIONReportsHagen, C. A., M. J. Willis, E. M. Glenn, and R. G. Anthony.2011. Habitat selection by greater sage-grouse during winterin southeastern Oregon. Western North American Naturalist71:529–538.Johnson, D. H. 1980. The comparison of usage and availabilitymeasurements for evaluating resource preference. Ecology61:65–71.Kelsey, R. G., J. R. Stephens, and F. Shaﬁzadeh. 1982. Thechemical constituents of sagebrush foliage and their isolation.Journal of Range Management 35:617–622.Kristan, W. B., III. 2006. Sources and expectations forhierarchical structure in bird–habitat associations. Condor108:5–12.Lawler, I. R., W. J. Foley, I. E. Woodrow, and S. J. Cork. 1997.The effects of elevated CO2 atmospheres on the nutritionalquality of eucalyptus foliage and its interaction with soilnutrient and light availability. Oecologia 109:59–68.Marsh , J. J , I. R. Wallis, and W. J. Foley. 2005. Detoxiﬁcationrates constrain feeding in common brushtail possums(Trichosurus vulpecula). Ecology 86:2946–2954.Mattson, W. J. 1980. Herbivory in relation to plant nitrogencontent. Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics 11:119–161.Moore, B. D., I. R. Lawler, I. R. Wallis, C. M. Beale, and W. J.Foley. 2010. Mapping palatability: a koala’s eye view ofspatial variation in habitat quality. Ecology 91:3165–3176.R Development Core Team. 2011. R, a language andenvironment for statistical computing. R Foundation forStatistical Computing, Vienna, AustriaRearden, S. N., R. G. Anthony, and B. K. Johnson. 2011.Birth-site selection and predation risk of Rocky Mountainelk. Journal of Mammology 92:1118–1126.Remington, T. E., and C. E. Braun. 1985. Sage-grouse foodselection in winter, North Park, Colorado. Journal ofWildlife Management 49:1055–1061.SAS Institute. 2008. SAS version 9.2. SAS Institute, Cary,North Carolina, USA.Schroeder, M. A., J. R. Young, and C. E. Braun. 1999. GreaterSage-Grouse (Centrocercus urophasianus). Number 425 in A.Poole, editor. The birds of North America. Academy ofNatural Sciences, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA, andAmerican Ornithologists’ Union, Washington, D.C., USA.Wallestad, R., J. G. Peterson, and R. L. Eng. 1975. Foods ofadult sage-grouse in central Montana. Journal of WildlifeManagement 39:628–630.Wambolt, C. L., M. R. Frisina, S. J. Knapp, and R. M. Frisina.2006. Effect of method, site, and taxon on line-interceptestimates of sagebrush cover. Wildlife Society Bulletin34:440–445.Welch, B. L., J. C. Pederson, and R. L. Rodriguez. 1988.Selection of big sagebrush by sage grouse. Great BasinNaturalist 48:274–279.White, T. C. R. 1978. The importance of a relative shortage offood in animal ecology. Oecologia 33:71–86.Wiens, J. A. 1989. Spatial scaling in ecology. FunctionalEcology 3:385–397.Wiens, J. A., J. T. Rotenberry, and B. Van Horne. 1986. Alesson on the limitations of ﬁeld experiments: shrubsteppebirds and habitat alterations. Ecology 67:365–376.SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIALAppendix AA photograph of diagnostic bite marks left by Greater Sage-Grouse (Centrocercus urophasianus) on sagebrush, Artemisia spp.(Ecological Archives E094-025-A1).Appendix BSupplementary information on the quantiﬁcation of monoterpene concentrations in sagebrush (Artemisia spp.) samples,including methods, materials, and a table of gas chromatograph retention times (Ecological Archives E094-025-A2).Appendix CMethods and materials used to quantify total phenolic concentrations in sagebrush (Artemisia spp.) samples (Ecological ArchivesE094-025-A3).Appendix DModel-selection tables for hierarchical analysis of Greater Sage-Grouse (Centrocercus urophasianus) habitat selection at each ofthree spatial scales (Ecological Archives E094-025-A4).Appendix EA cross-tabulation of patch type by habitat type for analyzing the selection of sagebrush (Artemisia spp.) habitat type by GreaterSage-Grouse (Centrocercus urophasianus) (Ecological Archives E094-025-A5).GRAHAM G. FRYE ET AL.314 Ecology, Vol. 94, No. 2Reports