Received: 22 Aug 2024. Received in revised form: 14 Oct 2024. Accepted: 29 Nov 2024. Published online: 27 Feb 2025. From Volume 49, Issue 1, 2021, Notulae Botanicae Horti Agrobotanici Cluj-Napoca journal uses article numbers in place of the traditional method of continuous pagination through the volume. The journal will continue to appear quarterly, as before, with four annual numbers.     Imran S et al. (2025) Notulae Botanicae Horti Agrobotanici Cluj-Napoca  Volume 53, Issue 1, Article number 14080 DOI:10.15835/nbha53114080  Review Article.   A panoramic review on phytochemistry, pharmacological potential, health benefits, and versatility of Solanum tuberosum L.  Sehrish IMRAN1a, Abdul QAYYUM2b, Xiaomeng YANG3c,  Yamin BIBI4*, Li-E YANG3, Xiaoying PU3, Xia LI3, Jiazhen YANG3, Yawen ZENG3*, Xiqiong HE5  1PMAS-Arid Agriculture University Rawalpindi, Department of Botany, Rawalpindi 46300,  Pakistan; sehrishimran07@gmail.com (S.I.) 2The University of Haripur, Department of Agronomy, Haripur, 22620, Pakistan; aqayyum@uoh.edu.pk (A.Q.) 3Yunnan Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Biotechnology and Germplasm Resources Institute, Agricultural Biotechnology Key Laboratory of Yunnan Province/Key Laboratory of the Southwestern Crop Gene Resources and Germplasm Innovation, Ministry of Agriculture, Kunming, Yunnan, 650205, China; yxm89ccf@126.com (X.Y.); yangyanglie@163.com (L.Y.); puxiaoying@163.com (X.P.); lixia_napus@163.com (X.L.); yangjiazhen415@163.com (J.Y.); zengyw1967@126.com (Y.Z.) (*corresponding author) 4Rawalpindi Women University, Department of Botany, Rawalpindi 46300, Pakistan; yamin.bibi@f.rwu.edu.pk (Y.B.) (*corresponding author) 5Lijiang Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lijiang, Yunnan, 674100, China; 407950199@qq.com (X.H.)  a,b,cThese authors contributed equally to the work  Abstract  The potato (Solanum tuberosum L.) belongs to the family Solanaceae and is one of most versatile crops, vital components of the human diet in numerous countries. It is regarded as one of the most promising crops for reducing world hunger and poverty. It is one of the foremost non-grain crops in the world, being a cost-effective and easily accessible food with several health benefits. The entire plant including peel, tuber, and leaves are used in traditional medicine. Potatoes are high in carbohydrates, lipids, phenolic acids, anthocyanins, carotenoids, proteins, flavonoids, vitamins, potassium, phosphorus, copper, and fiber. The purpose of this review study was to present up-to-date information on novel metabolites discovered in potatoes that play a role in preventing illness and improve human well-being. We attempted to assemble data on the variety of pharmacological activity including antioxidant, anti-diabetic, antihypertensive, anticancer, antiobesity and anti-inflammatory properties of potatoes, as well as their function in enhancing gut health and satiety. In-vitro investigations, human cell culture, experimental animal studies have revealed that potatoes have a variety of health-promoting qualities. The observations and recommendations presented here are scientifically interesting for food chemistry, pharmacology, nanotechnology, and toxicology. These may also contribute to enhance nutrition, food safety, and human health.  Keywords: anticancer; anti-obesity; antioxidant; food; nanoparticles; potato    AcademicPresNotulae Botanicae HortiCluj-NapocaAgrobotaniciImran S et al. (2025). Not Bot Horti Agrobo 53(1):14080  2       Introduction  The potato (Solanum tuberosum L.)  has been an important food source for human populations for hundreds of years (Beals, 2019). In nineteenth-century Europe, the starter of the potato from the New World also made a substantial contribution to the Industrial Revolution. The potato was an important food crop because it helped small farmers.  After wheat and rice, potatoes are currently the third-largest food crop worldwide (Jansky et al., 2019). About 15% of the world's population gets their energy from the potato, which is a widely grown commercial crop and the most common food crop (Karim et al., 2016). On the other hand, particularly in United States and in the highlands of American countries, adults consume 5-6 times the amount of potato consumed in developed countries. In 2018, China ranked first in potato production, accounting for approximately 24.53% of global output (Li et al., 2023). Worldwide, a lot of people consume potato (Solanum tuberosum L.) tubers because they are high in fiber, energy, protein, and vitamins, among other nutrients, and low in fats (Ercoli et al., 2021). Additionally, potatoes are inexpensive and available all year round. It is mostly used as a source of carbohydrates when taken as food. However, there is still much to understand about potato nutrients and human health (Jansky et al., 2019). Usually, potatoes are used to create well-known consumer goods such mashed potatoes snack food and potato chips (Li et al., 2018; Yang et al., 2021; Dong et al., 2024).  The Solanum tuberosum L. is a tuberous, starchy, and perennial plant of the family Solanaceae (also known as the nightshades), which is well known for its economic and ecological significance (Aksoy et al., 2021). Its taxonomy can be quite complex due to the numerous species and varieties. The cultivated potato commonly found in diets is Solanum tuberosum L. Approximately 200 different potato varieties exist, and they are divided into several groups based on how they cook and how well they work as an ingredient. A deep convolutional neural network was trained to distinguish four different types of potatoes (red, red washed, purple sweet, and white) using a publicly available dataset of 2400 photos of potatoes (Elsharif et al., 2020; Li et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024).  The carbohydrate-rich meal potato, together with a small amount of fat, gives a person 130 kcal of daily energy. This nutritious vegetable contains numerous vitamins, polyphenols (0.0071-0.031%), crude fibers (0.6-0.8%), proteins (1.5-2.3%), starch (9-20%) (Ezekiel et al., 2013). The presence of carotenoids and anthocyanins in potatoes causes them to come in a variety of colors, although the genotypes with no color are the most prevalent (Rasheed et al., 2022). The flesh and peel of potatoes include several bioactive substances like polyphenols, anthocyanins, and carotenoids that have been intensively studied, giving the tubers considerable significance. (Tian, et al., 2022). Among the most widely consumed vegetables, potatoes demonstrated excellent antioxidant capacity. In terms of hydrophilic antioxidant capacity, the Russet potato, one of the most popular kinds in North America, comes in second only to broccoli in terms of antioxidant content.  As a staple crop, potatoes are ideally suited to provide these antioxidant phytochemicals, and new research on colored potatoes with high anthocyanin and carotene concentrations has increased interest in potatoes' ability to promote health (Tsao, 2009). Numerous investigations have reported that, because of its antioxidant (Kowalczewski et al., 2012) analgesic, anti-inflammatory (Wahyudi et al., 2020), anticancer/antitumor (Vanamala, 2019) and antiulcer properties, potatoes have been shown to usually be helpful in the prevention or treatment of chronic diseases. The tubers are also used as anti-gout, anti-arthritic, anti-scurvy, and diuretic and to increase milk production in lactating mothers (Gnanasekaran and Basalingappa, 2018). Potatoes are storable, inexpensive, thrive in a variety of climates, and can provide extremely high yields per acre. As a result, potatoes can contribute to raising agricultural output to meet the estimated increase in demand required by 2050 to assure global food security. Furthermore, specialized baby potatoes, particularly color-flesh varieties, may appeal to consumers looking to increase their phytonutrient consumption or discover new food (Valcarce Navarre et al., 2019). Most studies have focused on the nutritional components of potatoes, including carotenoids, phenolics, anthocyanins, vitamins, proteins, and minerals. In recent years, a limited Imran S et al. (2025). Not Bot Horti Agrobo 53(1):14080  3       number of studies have examined the invitro bio accessibility of these substances (Mishra et al., 2020; Raigond et al., 2023). Potatoes contain a wide range of health-promoting compounds that play significant roles in disease prevention. Most research has concentrated on the presence of these compounds in colorful potatoes, while fewer studies have explored the presence of several health-promoting compounds in regular cream-yellow fleshed potatoes. This review offers a comprehensive synthesis of potatoes as nutrient-rich foods and sources of bioactive phytochemicals. It highlights their nutritional value, health benefits in raw and processed forms, therapeutic potential, and explores the commercial applications of potato byproducts for sustainable use.   Contribution to Diet   Dietary fiber The Solanum tuberosum L., is a plant that is well-known for its nutritional benefits as a large source of protein, dietary fiber, and carbohydrate. As the fourth most important food crop worldwide, potatoes offer two major types of dietary fiber: water-insoluble dietary fiber (IDF) and water-soluble dietary fiber (SDF). SDF is known for its favorable physiological effects and primarily serves roles such as cholesterol reduction, blood sugar level regulation, lowering the threat of cardiovascular and cerebrovascular. Key constituents of SDF include glucan, pectin, soluble arabxylan and xylo-oligosaccharide (Shen et al., 2020). Given SDF's heightened physiological significance compared to IDF, there's a growing focus on researching efficient and secure methods to transform IDF into SDF, making it a prominent research area. An average daily intake of 18 g/day of SDF for the purpose of reducing fasting blood glucose levels is required (Ma et al., 2022).  Insoluble dietary fiber (IDF) encourages the mechanical movement of intestinal contents, which helps to regulate intestinal function, avoid constipation, and maintain the health of the large intestine. IDF's main ingredients are cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin (Zhang et al., 2023). Potatoes have historically served as a primary starch source, and in China, sweet potatoes were responsible for approximately 33% of the starch supplied to various industries (Liu et al., 2020). Because potatoes are frequently thought of as high-carb, calorie-dense meals with large fat content, possess significant health-promoting qualities are frequently underestimated by the public (Singh et al., 2020; Luo et al., 2021; Gao et al., 2022).   Carbohydrates  The primary carbohydrate in potatoes is starch, which is composed of amylose and amylopectin. Amylose consists of linear chains of glucose linked by α-1,4 glycosidic bonds, while amylopectin is a branched polymer containing both α-1,4 and α-1,6 linkages. These two forms determine the starch granule structure and its digestibility. Starch in potatoes can be classified into three types: rapidly digestible starch (RDS), slowly digestible starch (SDS), and resistant starch (RS) (Sawicka and Gupta, 2018). RDS, which is digested within 20 to 120 minutes of ingestion, causes rapid increases in blood glucose levels, whereas SDS, despite being fully digested in the small intestine, supports stable blood glucose levels due to its slow absorption (Ulmius et al., 2012). Resistant starch, found in raw or processed potatoes, remains undigested in the small intestine but undergoes fermentation in the large intestine, producing short-chain fatty acids that promote gut health (Venn and Green, 2007; Zhang et al., 2023; Ban et al., 2024).  Resistant starch Some potatoes contain resistant starch, a kind of carbohydrate that resists digestion in the small intestine and reaches the colon, where it can be fermented by gut bacteria. Metabolomics can help identify the metabolites produced during this fermentation process, offering insights into the potential benefits of resistant starch on health of gut and the production of short-chain fatty acids, which may have health-promoting effects (Birt et al., 2013).  Imran S et al. (2025). Not Bot Horti Agrobo 53(1):14080  4       Potatoes starch contains some resistant starch, which acts like dietary fiber in the body. It can help improve digestive health and may have a positive impact on blood sugar control. Resistant starch (RS) is useful to humans, particularly those with diabetes. Raw potato contained a high concentration of RS, the majority of which became digestible afterwards gelatinization. As such, just a small amount of RS remains in potatoes after normal cooking (Peng et al., 2022). Potatoes include two of the five RS subcategories: RS 2 (found primarily in raw potatoes) and RS 3 (produced after potatoes are cooked and chilled, causing the starch to gelatinize and retrograde). RS is classified into RS1, RS2, RS3, RS4 and RS5, Permitting to the mechanism of its enzymatic resistance. According to Liu et al., 2020 raw potatoes are a natural source of RS and contain between 47 and 59% of it in their dry mass. However, RS2—which typically takes the form of a B- or C-type polymorph—makes up the majority of RS in raw potatoes and is greatly digestible after gelatinization (Liu et al., 2020; Robertson et al., 2020). Several studies concluded that Certain kinds of resistant starch (RS) have been linked to enhanced whole-body insulin sensitivity.  It is also suggested that RS-enriched potatoes may have a favorable impact on carbohydrate metabolism (Sanders et al., 2021). Resistance starch contains absorptive and digesting qualities that may be beneficial to health. Dietary RS is distinct in that it does not disintegrate as quickly as regular starch and has significant health benefits, some of which are like those offered by dietary fiber and others of which are specific to RS (Raatz et al., 2016). Increased satiety, higher insulin sensitivity, improved glycemic management, and improved gut health are among the physiological effects of RS that have been scientifically proven (Keenan et al., 2015).  Lipids Potato lipids are relatively low, ranging from 0.1 to 0.5 g/100 g fresh weight (FW), primarily consisting of phospholipids (47%), glycol and galactolipids (22%), which play crucial roles as structural components in biological membranes, and neutral lipids (21%), including acylglycerols and free fatty acids, which serve as an energy storage and source in the potato. These lipid components collectively contribute to the functionality and stability of cell membranes in potatoes while also providing a limited energy reserve in the form of neutral lipids (Ramadan and Oraby, 2016) On the other hand, the intake of 4% saturated fatty acids and 6% trans fatty acids in potato dishes is primarily due to the incorporation of oils and fats like margarine and butter into the recipes. This addition of saturated and trans fats can significantly raise the overall fat content and, consequently, increase the health concerns associated with potato-based meals, as excessive consumption of these fats is known to be linked to various cardiovascular and health risks (Burgos et al., 2020). The fatty acid content of potato lipids is nutritionally beneficial. For instance, in the United Kingdom, potato consumption is projected to provide approximately 10% of dietary n-6 polyunsaturated fatty acids and approximately 13% of dietary n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (Gibson and Kurilich, 2013). The potato's total lipid content ranges between 0.15% and 0.5% of its fresh weight. Potato lipids are high in linoleic and linolenic acids. It may contain bioactive lipid components such as phospholipids, sterols, glycolipids, and carotenoids, which are more desired because of their health-promoting properties (Lal et al., 2020; Ji et al., 2023).  Proteins There are many amino acids in potato protein that have hydrophobic functional groups, particularly branched including isoleucine, leucine, and valine along with the aromatic amino acids, phenylalanine, and tyrosine (Karenlampi and White, 2009). The proportion of different amino acids methionine, lysine, tryptophan, and threonine, in varied meals ingested by humans are likely to reduce the protein. Potatoes contain more of these essential amino acids than is required, indicating that potato protein is of excellent quality (Table 2). Potato protein has a high biological value as it contains all of the essential amino acids in good proportions. Potato protein serves as an excellent emulsifier and stabilizer in food applications. Red and purple Imran S et al. (2025). Not Bot Horti Agrobo 53(1):14080  5       potato cultivars have been reported to contain higher protein levels than yellow and cream-fleshed varieties, indicating varietal differences in nutrient content (Głosek-Sobieraj et al., 2022).  Minerals Potato tubers are known for their relatively high potassium content. A study reported that high yielding, medium-sized potato (about 200 grams) can contain anywhere from 720-850 milligrams of potassium. This is representing 18% of the recommended dietary reference intake for potassium is 4,700 mg for adults (see Table 1) (White et al., 2009). Potassium is essential for maintaining proper muscle function, regulating blood pressure, and supporting overall cardiovascular health. Potassium can lower the risk of stroke, blood pressure, kidney stones, heart disease, and support normal cardiac rhythms. A recent study found that a lack of potassium is linked to artery stiffening (Sun et al., 2017). Potatoes contain phosphorus and magnesium in moderate amounts, with phosphorus levels ranging from 42 to 120 mg/100 g fresh weight (FW) and magnesium levels ranging from 16 to 40 mg/100 g FW. These minerals are important for various physiological functions in the body, including bone health and energy metabolism. In children the P requirements go from 400 to 700 mg/day, in adolescents is about 1 gr/day while in adult the daily average requirement is in the range 600-700. The calcium content in potatoes typically falls within the range of 2-20 mg per 100 grams of fresh weight (FW). Consuming potatoes can provide a relatively small amount of calcium, contributing a little more than 2% of the Estimated Average Requirement (EAR) for calcium in adults. The recommended daily intake of calcium for adults usually ranges from 800 to 1000 mg per day, depending on individual factors (Bonierbale et al., 2010). In cooked potatoes, the concentrations of zinc range from 0.29 to 0.48 mg per 100 grams of fresh weight (FW), and the concentrations of iron range from 0.29 to 0.69 mg per 100 grams of fresh weight (FW) (Burgos et al., 2007). Potatoes are a significant nutritional supply of iron.  In the Andean highlands, there is minimal availability of meat and a high incidence of malnutrition and anemia. Women and children in Huancavelica, Peru's highlands, consume varying amounts of potatoes, ranging from 200 to 840 grams per day, reflecting the importance of potatoes as a staple food in their diet (De Haan et al., 2019). Potatoes, due to their high potassium and low salt content, appear to be a suitable food to integrate into a hypertension-management diet. Despite this, only a few research has specifically looked at the effect of potatoes in management of blood pressure and hypertension. According to a recent epidemiological study that utilized data from Harvard's renowned Nurses' Health Study I and II, as well as the Health Professionals Follow-up Study cohorts, "higher intake of baked, boiled, or mashed potatoes and French fries was independently and prospectively associated with an increased risk of developing hypertension"(Borgi et al., 2016).   Table 1. The mineral content of 200 g fresh weight of potatoes and its contribution to the U.S. Dietary Reference Intake (DRI) Mineral DRI US potatoes UK potatoes DRI Percent K(mg) 4700 850 720 18 P(mg) 700 118 74 17 Mg(mg) 420 45 34 11 Ca(mg) 1000 22 10 2.2 Cl(mg) 2300 - 132 - N(mg) NS - 660 - S(mg) NS - 60 - Na(mg) 1500 12 14 0.8 Fe(mg) 8 1.4 0.8 18 Zn(mg) 11 0.6 0.6 5.51 Mn(mg) 2.3 0.3 0.2 13 Cu (µg) 900 231 160 26 I (µg) 150 37 6 25 Se (µg) 55 0.8 2 1.4 Mineral contents are means of different high yielding cultivar in UK and US (Unspecified verities, skin flesh) White et al., 2009. The DRI are those for a 31-50-year-old male (National Academy of science 2004). NS= Not specified Imran S et al. (2025). Not Bot Horti Agrobo 53(1):14080  6       Vitamins  Potatoes are definitely a good source of ascorbic acid, which is also known as vitamin C, and pyridoxine, which is vitamin B6 (Mushinskiy et al., 2021). Vitamin C, is an antioxidant that helps boost the immune system, promote healthy skin, and support wound healing. Scurvy is caused by a lack of vitamin C, which causes a failing of blood vessels, connective tissues bones, hair, and teeth, then joint inflammation, and eventually death. Potatoes are a key source of vitamin C around the world, accounting for about 20% of dietary consumption in Europe (Table 2). They are the basis of vitamin C not only because of their high concentration, but also because they can be kept, resulting in consistent availability. Any increases in the vitamin C content of potato products will benefit human nutrition (Love and Pavek, 2008). According to Valcarcel et al. (2015), the levels of vitamin C in potato flesh, ranging from 798 to 117 mg/kg, are directly proportional to the production of L-galactono-1,4-lactone dehydrogenase, which is an enzyme involved in the pathway for vitamin C (l-ascorbate) biosynthesis in plants. This means that as the production of this enzyme increases, there is a corresponding increase in the levels of vitamin C in the potato flesh. This relationship reflects the importance of this enzymatic pathway in the biosynthesis of vitamin C in potatoes (Valcarcel et al., 2015). Potato has significant quantities of ascorbic acid, which is known to improve iron absorption (Burgos et al., 2020). Potatoes are also good source of vitamin B6, with concentrations typically ranging from 0.450 to 0.675 mg per 100 grams of fresh weight (FW). Vitamin B6, also known as pyridoxine, plays a crucial role in various metabolic processes in the body, including the metabolism of amino acids and the production of neurotransmitters. Consuming potatoes can contribute to meeting your dietary vitamin B6 requirements (Mooney et al., 2013). In comparison to other staple foods, cooked potatoes have a higher mean concentration of vitamin B6, with approximately 0.299 mg per 100 grams of fresh weight (FW). This is significantly higher than the vitamin B6 content found in maize (0.139 mg/100 g FW), cassava (0.051 mg/100 g FW), rice (0.050 mg/100 g FW), and wheat (0.034 mg/100 g FW) (Fudge et al., 2017). The potato tuber also comprises an adequate level of vitamin E. Vitamin E refers to a group of eight related tocopherols and tocotrienols (Chitchumroonchokchai et al., 2017).  Table 2. Potatoes' proximate composition and nutritive value per 100 g Nutritional composition Amount Unit References Moisture content 3.36-5.66 Mg Burgos et al., 2020; Borgi et al., 2016; Burlingame et al., 2009 Energy  96-123 Kcal Burgos et al., 2020; Burlingame et al., 2009 Carbohydrate (Starch) 16-20 G Robertson et al., 2020; Furrer et al., 2018 Ash 6.69-9.31 Mg Burgos et al., 2020 Protein  1.76-2.94 G Robertson et al., 2020; Mushinskiy et al., 2021; Furrer et al., 2018 Lipids 0.1-0.5 G Ramadan and Oraby, 2016 Dietary Fibers 1.8-2.1 G King and Slavin, 2013 Potassium  150-1386 Mg Nassar et al., 2012 Vitamin C 7.8 -20.6 Mg Burgos et al., 2020 Phosphorus 42-120 Mg Bonierbale et al., 2010 Zinc 0.29-0.48 Mg Gibson and Kurilich, 2013; Wijesinha-Bettoni and Mouille, 2019 Magnesium  16-40 Mg Wijesinha-Bettoni and Mouille, 2019 Iron  0.29-0.69 Mg Wijesinha-Bettoni and Mouille, 2019 Vitamin B6 0.299 Mg Furrer et al., 2018 Chlorogenic acid 3-90 Mg Ezekiel et al., 2013; Visvanathan et al., 2016 Imran S et al. (2025). Not Bot Horti Agrobo 53(1):14080  7       Glycoalkaloids 3-20 mg Lister and Munro, 2000; Bradshaw, 2019; Visvanathan et al., 2016 Anthocyanins 5.5-35 Mg Camire et al., 2009; Visvanathan et al., 2016  Phytochemicals Potatoes are rich in health-promoting substances that contribute significantly to their role in dietary phytochemistry. Studies have found that potatoes exhibit higher antioxidant activity compared to other vegetables, such as carrots, bell peppers, and onions, primarily due to their phenolic content (Blessington et al., 2010). The key hydrophilic antioxidants in potatoes include polyphenols, ascorbic acid, anthocyanins, and flavanols. Yellow-fleshed potatoes derive their antioxidant activity mainly from chlorogenic acids, caffeic acid, gallic acid, and catechin, while anthocyanins and chlorogenic acids contribute to the antioxidant properties of pigmented potatoes (Figure 1). Chlorogenic acid, the most prevalent polyphenol in potatoes, plays a critical role in preventing lipid oxidation (Burgos et al., 2013). The antioxidant components in potatoes serve multiple functions, including scavenging superoxide radicals, chelating ferrous ions, neutralizing free radicals, and breaking down lipid peroxides. Polyphenolic substances are significant contributors to the antioxidant potential of potatoes and their extracts (Camire et al., 2009). Purple-fleshed potatoes, known for their higher polyphenol content, exhibit superior antioxidant capacity due to the presence of anthocyanins and petunidin derivatives (Ercoli et al., 2021). In contrast, yellow and white potatoes have lower total phenolic content (TPC), leading to reduced antioxidant properties (Ru et al., 2019). Phenolic compounds in potatoes also provide a variety of health benefits beyond antioxidant activity. They exhibit antibacterial, antidiabetic, anti-inflammatory, antiviral, anti-cancer, and vasodilatory properties (Mattila and Hellstrom, 2007). Phenolic acids such as chlorogenic, ferulic, caffeic, and sinapic acids are particularly abundant. Anthocyanins, responsible for the red-blue pigmentation in some potato varieties, not only affect the sensory properties of foods but also offer potential health benefits by influencing food processing behaviors (de Pascual-Teresa and Sanchez-Ballesta, 2008). Potatoes contain three isomers of chlorogenic acid, including 5-O-caffeoylquinic acid, which supports gut health by promoting the growth of beneficial Bifidobacterium species (Mills et al., 2015). Chlorogenic acid is the most abundant phenolic acid in both raw and boiled potatoes, highlighting its dietary relevance (Li et al., 2018).   Figure 1. Structure of some phytochemicals (phenols, flavanols, anthocyanins) have been isolated from potatoes  Imran S et al. (2025). Not Bot Horti Agrobo 53(1):14080  8       Flavonols, although present in small quantities in potato tubers, further enrich the phytochemical profile. Trace amounts of flavonols like rutin and kaempferol are found in potatoes, with levels ranging from 0 to 4.78 mg/100 g FW for rutin and from 0 to 5.68 mg/100 g FW for kaempferol-3-O-rutinoside in Andean varieties (Andre et al., 2007). The production of flavonols is influenced by environmental factors, with light-exposed potatoes accumulating more flavonols than those stored in darkness. Cold storage also increases the levels of both flavonols and anthocyanins in tubers (Schulz et al., 2016). Pigmented potatoes contain anthocyanins acylated with caffeic, p-coumaric, and ferulic acids, which enhance their antioxidant capacity (Giusti et al., 2014). Raw and cooked purple-fleshed potatoes contain anthocyanin concentrations ranging from 63 to 588 mg/100 g FW and 71 to 453 mg/100 g FW, respectively. In contrast, cooked red-fleshed potatoes have lower anthocyanin levels, ranging from 8.2 to 55.3 mg/100 g FW (Burgos, 2014). Additionally, potatoes are a source of carotenoids, which are lipophilic phytonutrients with numerous health-promoting effects, including reducing the risk of chronic diseases (Wu et al., 2015). The bioavailability of carotenoids from potatoes depends on factors such as their molecular structure, release from the food matrix, intestinal absorption, transport within lipoproteins, and the nutritional status of the consumer (Bohn, 2017). While the presence of carotenoids in potatoes offers significant health benefits, further research is needed to better understand their bioavailability and physiological impact.  Glycoalkaloids Potatoes and other Solanaceae members contain nitrogenous substances called glycoalkaloids. Potatoes include the glycoalkaloids such as α -chaconine and α -solanine as their main components. These chemicals are localized in the skin and have varying ratios (Table 2). The steroidal glycoalkaloids found in the Liliaceae and Solanaceae families have historically been referred to as "glycoalkaloids." These substances are currently sometimes referred to as Solanum glycoalkaloids (SGA) or potato glycoalkaloids (PGA), but this terminology is not widely used. Over 300 Solanum species have yielded at minimum 90 structurally distinct steroidal alkaloids, which have been isolated and categorized (Friedman et al., 1997). Glycoalkaloids are nitrogen-rich secondary plant metabolites present in a wide variety of Solanaceae plants, such as potatoes, tomatoes, and eggplant (Al Sinani and Eltayeb, 2017) When subjected to the glycoalkaloids (α -chaconine and α -solanine) and their hydrolysis product produced by potatoes, the cancer cells are inhibited from growing both in vitro (in a culture dish) and in vivo (in a tumor) (Freidman, 2015). Glycoalkaloids are harmful to humans when consumed in large quantities. In fact, several human case studies have shown that ingesting large doses of potato glycoalkaloids can cause disease (particularly gastrointestinal tract symptoms like nausea, abdominal cramping, and diarrhea) and eventually death (Beals, 2019). According to Friedman (2006), glycoalkaloids have both detrimental and advantageous effects, such as decreasing cholesterol and having anti-inflammatory, antiallergenic, and antipyretic properties. Glycoalkaloids may possibly have antibacterial and antiproliferative properties (Friedman et al., 2006).  Grunenfelder et al. (2006) challenged the assumption that green potatoes had greater glycoalkaloids concentrations. Both glycoalkaloids and chlorophyll in the presence of light, assemble in potato skins, although they do so independently. The total glycoalkaloids content (TGA) of new cultivars is evaluated because of concern about the impact of these substances on human health (Brown, 2008). The two main substances in commercial potato cultivars are α -solanine and α -chaconine, which are glycosides of the steroidal alkaloid solanidine. Although there is considerable disagreement over the precise role that these substances play in plants, it has been demonstrated that these and comparable substances have hazardous effects on people. Even within the same cultivar, climatic variances in the growing location might result in significant variations in the glycoalkaloids concentration.  Additionally, even after harvest, tubers continue to produce glycoalkaloids, and poor handling and/or storage practices may result in a sharp increase in these substances. Content of glycoalkaloids may also change due to processing. Although the amounts of glycoalkaloids appear to be mainly unaffected by cooking, cutting, peeling, and other forms of preparation may vary the levels. Imran S et al. (2025). Not Bot Horti Agrobo 53(1):14080  9       Commercial potato peel goods and chips can include large levels of glycoalkaloids, however the amount of glycoalkaloids in these products can vary greatly (Manach et al., 2018).   Low fats and calories In practice, plant-based diets, whether they include starchy or non-starchy foods, tend to have a lower energy density compared to diets primarily based on animal-derived foods and high in sugar (Zhang et al., 2018). Potatoes are naturally low in fat and calories, which make them a healthy option for those looking to control their calorie intake and maintain a healthy weight. Without the addition of high-calorie toppings or additives, potatoes are considered a low-calorie food, containing approximately 440 calories per pound. They are high in carbohydrates and have a lower sugar content than other tuber vegetables such as carrots, sweet potatoes (ValcarceNavarre et al., 2019).  Proteases inhibitors  Protease inhibitors are well-known for their anticancer properties. Protease inhibitors are small molecular weight peptides (5 and 25 kDa) that form diverse protein group than patatin. Researchers discovered and extracted several protease inhibitors from potatoes (Raigond et al., 2023). Several studies demonstrated antitumor efficacy of potato protease inhibitors. StAPs have been proven in vitro and in vivo to exert anticancer action by inducing selective permeable membrane penetration and cytotoxicity in cancer cells. StAPs were also found to have a dose-dependent cytotoxic impact. Animal studies have indicated that StAPs reduce tumor growth in melanoma xenografts in arthymic nude mice (Kowalczewski et al., 2022).   Contribution to Health  A new evidence base is emerging to support vegetables and fruits protective effect in the prevention of cancer, diverticulosis, chronic pulmonary disease, and maybe hypertension (Van Duyn and Pivonka, 2000). The potato has been a staple of human diets for thousands of years, first in the Andes and then throughout the world. Cooking, potato consumption, and nutritional bioavailability all influence its contribution. The major phytonutrients present in potatoes, including minerals, proteins, and fibers, are often effectively preserved after cooking. Vitamins C and B6 are dramatically reduced after cooking, although anthocyanins and carotenoids improve quickly due to better release of these antioxidants from the food matrix (Tian et al., 2016). In summary, potatoes can be a nutritious and valuable part of a healthy diet when consumed in moderation and prepared in a health-conscious manner. Incorporating a variety of vegetables and balanced food choices into your diet is key to maximizing their contributions to human health (Table 3).   Table 3. Biological properties and biological/physiological effects of potato compounds Biological properties Used model Dose Compounds Mechanisms & biological effects References Antioxidant activity Male adult man 150 g cooked daily for 6 weeks Phenolic acid  anthocyanins PP potatoes showed significant result as compared to YP and WP. Protect DNA and other biomolecules from oxidative damage by increasing the expression of cellular antioxidant enzymes. Also prevent lipids peroxidation. Kaspar et al., 2011 Rats (male Wistar) Oral administration of 100 mg/kg Peptides (Phe-Gly-Glu-Arg) (Phe-Asp-Arg-Arg) (Phe-Gly-Glu-Arg-Arg) Kudo et al., 2009 Imran S et al. (2025). Not Bot Horti Agrobo 53(1):14080  10       Anticancer Colon and liver cells HepG_2 100 mg/mL. Chlorogenic acid, pelargonidin chloride, and malvidin chloride phenolic, protease inhibitors proteins and peptides anthocyanins, fibre, lactins, glycoalkaloids  Pigmented potatoes extract showed more significant result than white. Stop tumor cell proliferation and H2O2 production; inhibit UV-induced AP-1 activation, Limit cancer cell motility; induce apoptosis; alter tumor cell morphology; absorb mutagens, restrict protein, DNA, and RNA synthesis in cancer cells. Reduce metastasis. Reduces the activities of matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) and MMP-9; cytotoxic to cancer cells, promote mitochondrial release and nuclear absorption of proapoptotic Endo G and AIF proteins, increase the expression of cellular antioxidant enzymes; inhibit cancer-related inflammatory mediators; and suppress ROS-mediated NF-kB, AP-1, and MAPK activation. Camire et al., 2009; Robert et al., 2006; Pouvreau et al., 2001; Langers et al., 2009; Kenny et al., 2013; Reddivari et al., 2010; Freidman et al., 2005; Hayashi et al., 2006; Madiwale et al., 2011; Yang and Yoon, 2012; Wang et al., 2011 Antiobesity obese-ob/ob mice,  150 and 300 mg/kg for 28 days Phenolics, protease inhibitors, proteins & peptides.  Standardized potato extract comprising 5% PPI II, which produces a satiety response. Down-regulation of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and uncoupled protein 3 (UCP-3) expression inhibits lipid metabolism, Increase CCK release and also improve CCK response primarily by inhibiting trypsin-like proteolytic activity. Boost CCK1R expression in enteroendocrine cells; block luminal proteases Ku et al., 2016; Komarnytsky et al., 2011; Chen et al., 2012; Foltz et al., 2008.  Imran S et al. (2025). Not Bot Horti Agrobo 53(1):14080  11       Antidiabetics STZ-induced diabetic rats Male Wister rats daily dose of 165 mg/kg b.w. for 14 days Phenolics fibers, acylated anthocyanin petunidin-3-O-p-coumaryl-rutinoside-5-O-glucoside Oral administration of extracts had lower fasting blood glucose and glycated hemoglobin levels in Diabetic rats. Reduce intestinal glucose absorption; lower oxidative stress and total food consumption, boost insulin sensitivity, inhibit hepatic glucose-6-phosphatase, regulates antioxidant enzyme activity, minimize glycemic response to meals, also liver and kidney hypertrophy. Bassoli  et al., 2008; Singh et al., 2005; Strugała et al., 2019 Anti-inflammatory Jurkat and Raw 264.7 macrophages 150 g of potatoes flashed for 6 weeks Glycoalkaloids α-solanine, solanidine, α-Chaconine phenolic acids, anthocyanins, & carotenoids Lower CRP, 8-hydroxydeoxyguanosine, and IL-6 levels in the blood. solanidine, α-Chaconine, Reduce IL-2 and IL-8 Con A-induced in Jurkat cells production; α-solanine, solanidine reduced induced NO production. Kasper et al., 2011; Kenny et al., 2013 Antihypertensive lead acetate (LAT)-induced hypertensive rats for 8 weeks Ethanol extract of potatoes 200 mg/kg Phenolic compounds, proteins & peptides Minimize systolic and diastolic blood pressure by inhibiting angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE), promote the production of cecal short-chain fatty acids. Also, ACE activity in blood was also suppressed by EGV treatment. EGV has an anti-hypersive activity via inhibition of ACE and can be used for the treatment hypertension. Kim et al., 2009; Mcgill et al., 2013.   Anticancer properties There is some evidence that eating green vegetables and fruits reduces the threat of cancer. (Boeing et al., 2012). Some investigations found that polyphenol extracts from potato tubers have demonstrated the ability to inhibit the proliferation in prostate (Wang et al., 2011) stomach (Bontempo et al., 2013) liver and colon (Kubow et al., 2017) cancer cells. Furthermore, potato extracts high in anthocyanins (Bontempo et al., 2013) and glycoalkaloids (Nogawa et al., 2019) demonstrated dose-dependent anticancer action in breast, cervical, and leukemia cancer cells. Several studies have found that using potato extracts reduces cancer cell Imran S et al. (2025). Not Bot Horti Agrobo 53(1):14080  12       proliferation. Antioxidants found in potatoes, including phenolic acids, fibers, anthocyanins, glycoalkaloids, and proteinase inhibitors, have been associated with the inhibition of both in vitro and in vivo cancer cell proliferation. The primary steroidal glycoalkaloids found in potatoes, are α -solanine and α -chaconine, have been extensively researched for their anticancer effects (Freidman, 2015). Potato peel has the highest concentration of α -solanine of any source. Study revealed that α -solanine may be an active and inexpensive source of cancer therapy. In addition, α -solanine is antipyretic, anti-allergic, anti-diabetic, anti-inflammatory, and antibiotic (Hassan et al., 2014).  A study reported that α-solanine suppressed cancer cell proliferation via caspase 3-dependent mitochondrial apoptosis, and that it also reduced the production of proteins associated with tumor metastasis, MMP-2 and MMP-9 (Sun et al., 2014). Potato extract containing anthocyanins has been found to be more cytotoxic against prostate cancer cells (Reddivari et al., 2019). Acrylamide may be present in fried potato products. Korean potato chips, for example, were found to have up to 4.0 g/kg acrylamide (Lee and Shim, 2007). Stomach cancer is inhibited by red and purple-fleshed potatoes (Rasheed et al., 2020). Numerous studies show that anthocyanin acts as an antioxidant against a variety of ailments, including dementia and colorectal cancer in mice (Lippert et al., 2017). Andean potato polyphenol extracts were tested for cytotoxicity against human neuroblastoma and hepatocarcinoma cell lines (Table 2). All cell types experienced a dose-dependent decrease in feasibility because of the treatments (Silveyra et al., 2019). During in vitro simulated gastrointestinal digestion, purple potatoes shown excellent antioxidant, antibacterial activities and additionally antiproliferative, against colon cancer cells (Caco2, SW 8) and breast cancer cells (MCF7, and MDAMB231) (Ombra et al., 2015). Extracts from purple potato have been shown to decrease colon carcinogenesis through killing cancer stem cells. Chlorogenic acid, and anthocyanins, have an anticancer impact.  It has been shown to suppress the proliferation of prostate and colon cancer cells as well as protect against colon, liver (Charepalli et al., 2015).  Antioxidant effects Due to their strong antioxidant capacity, anthocyanins and HCADs defend against several disorders brought on by reactive oxygen species (ROS). Phenols, particularly certain flavonoids have a strong capability to bind to free radicals and function as antioxidants, which has a positive impact on the prevention of cardiovascular, cancer, and neurological disorders (Ercoli et al., 2021). When eaten with the skin on, the potato tuber has a lot of nutritional fiber. It also has a lot of antioxidant components (Samaniego et al., 2020). Phenolic chemicals, vitamin C, flavonoids, and carotenoids are the primary antioxidants. Phenolic acids, flavonols, and anthocyanin components are the four different forms of polyphenols that are present in potatoes (Zhao et al., 2020). Chlorogenic acid, which accounts for around 90% of the total polyphenol content (TPC) in potatoes, is the most prevalent polyphenol there. Compounds with antioxidant properties are abundant in potatoes. Due to their frequent use in the diet, studies have shown that potatoes are ranked in the   third position among foods in terms of daily intake of antioxidant components, after oranges and apples. Many scientists have noted the beneficial impact of antioxidant components on human health. These studies demonstrate how ingesting foods with strong antioxidant qualities can improve the quality of diets. Moreover, scientists are always looking for novel natural substances having antioxidant properties, such as components of proteins, peptides, hydrolysates, polyphenols, and flavonoids (Burgos et al., 2019). Numerous epidemiological studies link dietary intake of polyphenols to the prevention of cardiovascular illnesses. The inhibition of oxidative stress, cell damage, protein damage, DNA damage and lipid peroxidation mechanism are said to be accomplished by polyphenols. Additionally, intake is linked to a reduction in the threat of neurodegenerative diseases including Parkinson’s and Alzheimer's (Xing et al., 2019).      Imran S et al. (2025). Not Bot Horti Agrobo 53(1):14080  13       Anti-inflammatory effects Potatoes contain a variety of anti-inflammatory compounds, including anthocyanins, which help to reduce inflammatory bowel syndrome and additional chronic disorders connected to gut health (Bibi et al., 2019). External application of raw potato juice might relieve swelling of joints and muscles. Potato starch has anti-inflammatory effects and can help cure gastrointestinal inflammation (Umadevi et al., 2013). Extract from peel was found to lessen the severity of dermatitis in Atopic dermatitis rats. A chloroform extract obtained from potato peels has been shown to reduce colitis severity and release proinflammatory mediators in rats induced with dextran sulfate sodium colitis (Kowalczewski et al., 2022). Kujawska et al. (2018) investigated the role of spray-dried potato juice in the treatment of mucosal damage induced by mucosal inflammation. Research has shown that spray-dried potato juice can reduce the mRNA expression and production of proinflammatory cytokines like IL-6 and TNF-α in cultures involving Caco-2 and RAW264.7 cells that have been exposed to lipopolysaccharide. This indicates the potential anti-inflammatory properties of spray-dried potato juice in mitigating the proinflammatory response. It was also found to protect against lipopolysaccharide-induced intestinal barrier integrity disturbance. Spray dried potato juice at 200 -500 mg/kg doses was shown to lower TNF- expression in stomach mucosa and minimize the prevalence of ulcers in rats (Kujawska et al., 2018). In comparison to white potatoes, for six weeks, eat 150 g purple potatoes on a regular basis, lowered the level of C-reactive protein and severe inflammation in healthy men. It is concluded that pigmented potatoes have higher anti-inflammatory effect. (Kaspr et al., 2011). The concentration of anthocyanin in pigmented potatoes is said to have an anti-inflammatory effect (Zhang et al., 2017). It was found that, in both animal models (Kujawska et al., 2018) and human clinical trials (Jiao et al., 2015), indigestible carbohydrates, specifically resistant starch and fiber, have demonstrated an impact on inflammatory markers. Anthocyanin enriched potatoes minimize colonic epithelial damage in colitis and improve gut absorptivity in rats. This research underscored the importance of the gut flora in the protective effects of anthocyanin-rich potatoes on the gut barrier. Because the medications used for the treatment of ulcerative colitis, (serious inflammatory bowel disease) have some negative side effects (Li and Reddivari, 2021). Hence, phenolics, glycoalkaloids, fiber, and resistance starch have direct impact of anti-inflammation in humans (Kenny et al., 2013).  Antihypertensive and cardioprotective effect Cardiovascular diseases (CVD) are among the most serious worldwide health concerns (World Health Organization, 2011). As a result, there is a lot of interest in nutraceuticals as agents for controlling hypertension and preventing cardiovascular disease. It is advisable to prepare and serve potatoes with minimal added fats, and it's also beneficial to consume the potato peels because they are a good source of dietary fiber. This dietary approach can help maintain heart health and overall well-being. Potato protein, and starches, (resistance and phosphorylated) have been shown to have cholesterol-lowering effects. Phytochemicals, particularly antioxidants, have been linked to a reduction in inflammation, which has been linked to cancer, cardiovascular disease, and diabetes. Potatoes, as a primary dietary source of mineral like potassium, vitamin C, and fiber, which contribute considerably to nutrients that play roles in improving cardiovascular fitness (McGill et al., 2013). Potatoes contain low levels of sodium and have high levels of potassium content, and thus have the ability to treat hypertension-related conditions (Raigond et al., 2023). In crossover research, 18 hypertensive individuals with an average BMI of 29 were given either 6-8 tiny microwaved purple potatoes twice a daily or no potatoes for four weeks, followed by four weeks on the reverse regimen. The potato had no effect on plasma glucose, lipids, or HbA1c and no noticeable rise in body weight. However, there was a significant reduction in diastolic blood pressure, with a decrease of 4.3% or 4 mm, and systolic blood pressure also decreased by 3.5% or 5 mm. Despite the fact that 14 of the 18 individuals were receiving antihypertensive medications, blood pressure dropped. That was the first study to look at how potatoes affect blood pressure and concluded that pigmented potatoes are an effective hypertensive gent that reduced the threat of cardiovascular diseases (Vinson Imran S et al. (2025). Not Bot Horti Agrobo 53(1):14080  14       et al., 2012). kukoamines is a compound that is used to regulate blood pressure. N1, N12-bis (dihydrocaffeoyl) spermine (kukoamine A) and N1, N8-bis (dihydrocaffeoyl) spermidine have been identified in potato tubers. These compounds are part of the diverse array of phytochemicals found in potatoes. In comparison to other chemicals, the concentration of kukoamines in potatoes is quite high (Parr et al., 2005). In vitro, peptides extracted from tubers inhibited angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) Isolates from immature (fresh) potatoes inhibited the least, while isolates from mature tubers, sprouting potatoes, commercial by-products inhibited the most (Pihlanto et al., 2008). There is little known about the role of potatoes in the prevention of cardiovascular disease. There is some evidence suggesting that potato protein, resistant starch, and phosphorylated starch may contribute to the reduction of cholesterol levels. These components of potatoes could potentially have beneficial effects on cholesterol management and cardiovascular health. Phytochemicals, particularly antioxidants, have been linked to a reduction in inflammation, a risk factor for cardiovascular disease (Camire et al., 2009). Potato tubers are naturally abundant in potassium, containing up to 400 mg/100 g fresh tubers or 1.7% DM (Schilling et al., 2018). Because of its vasodilation action, potassium can help reduce blood pressure (Usmani and Mishra 2016).   Anti-diabetes and anti-obesity  The prevalence of diabetes is increasing globally, and further research is essential to establish and confirm the potential links between potato polyphenolic compounds and dietary fiber and their roles in diabetes prevention or treatment (Figure 2). Metabolomics has been used to study the impact of potato ingestion on blood sugar levels. As we know that, potatoes are a main source of carbohydrates. Different potato varieties and cooking methods can result in variations in the glycemic response. Metabolomics studies can help identify specific metabolites associated with blood sugar regulation after potato consumption, contributing to our understanding of their impact on conditions like diabetes. Potatoes contain resistance, so consumption of RS has been found to increase whole-body insulin sensitivity (Maki and Phillips, 2015). A main hazard for the development of T2D is decreased insulin sensitivity (i.e., insulin resistance), Several treatments that promote insulin sensitivity have been demonstrated to lower the incidence of newly-onset T2D (Kitabchi et al., 2005). It has been revealed that the gut microbiota's fermentation of resistant starch (RS) is the mechanism through which insulin resistance may be influenced consequences. Because RS in the small intestine is not completely digested, it functions physiologically like a mixture of starch and dietary fiber (Sanders et al., 2021). Short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) such as acetate, propionate, and butyrate can be generated through the fermentation of resistant starch (RS) in the colon. These acids are taken into the bloodstream and have a variety of metabolic This fermentation process is carried out by gut bacteria and can have various health benefits, including contributing to the energy supply of colon cells and potentially influencing overall health and metabolic functions. (Keenan et al., 2015). The first consequence is the inhibition of hormone sensitive lipase, which lowers the release of free fatty acids (FFA) from adipocytes (Kimura et al., 2014). With an injected lipid emulsion, for example, raising plasma FFA levels for some hours causes insulin resistance, while lowering them for some hours with the niacin analogue acipimox increases insulin sensitivity (Oh et al., 2018).  When administered as 10% of the meal, potato peel extracts, which are rich in polyphenolic compounds, have been observed to reduce oxidative stress, hyperglycemia (high blood sugar levels), and overall food consumption in diabetic mice. These findings suggest a potential role for potato peel extracts in managing oxidative stress and blood sugar levels in a diabetic context. (Singh et al., 2005).  The researchers found that long-term research is required to demonstrate the correlation between potato ingestion and diseases such as cancer, overweight, diabetes, and cardiovascular disease (Figure 2). Because current findings on potato consumption and disease management are conflicting. Some studies found potatoes to be effective in controlling obesity and diabetes, while others showed no benefit and others revealed a harmful effect of potato consumption on diabetes and obesity (Visvanathan et al., 2016). 5-caffeoylquinic acid co- and pre-incubated with porcine pancreatic amylase inhibited amylase in five potato types (variable phenolic content). The dose of Imran S et al. (2025). Not Bot Horti Agrobo 53(1):14080  15       5-caffeoylquinic acid was found to affect enzyme inhibition. Researchers concluded that many characteristics of potato tubers, such as dry weight, starch, phenolics, influence digestibility. In vivo research revealed that chlorogenic acid lowers blood glucose levels by inhibiting starch breakdown (Karim et al., 2017). Polyphenols found in potato juice have been shown to help people with weight loss and regulate their blood sugar levels. In rats fed a high-fat diet, a polyphenol-rich extract derived from potatoes-controlled insulin, leptin, and stomach peptide levels. Pure chlorogenic acid treatment improved insulin secretion regulation insulin sensitivity, and glucose tolerance, in animals (Kubow et al., 2014). Pigmented potato extracts were assessed for their capacity to inhibit α-glucosidase, aldose reductase activity, and α-amylase. These potatoes were characterized by high polyphenol content, particularly chlorogenic acid. The predominant anthocyanins in these potatoes included derivatives of malvidin, peonidin, pelargonidin, and petunidin. These compounds are of interest due to their potential role in modulating enzymes related to blood sugar regulation and their antioxidant properties. Purple fleshed extracts inhibited -amylase and –glucosidase, (IC50: 25 g/ml, and 42 g/ml respectively, and aldose reductase enzymes more effectively. These findings suggest that purple potatoes have the ability to manage diabetes by inhibiting carbohydrate degrading enzymes (Kalita et al., 2018). Diabetes is becoming more common all over the world. Further research is needed to establish the relationship between potato dietary fiber and polyphenolic content in the management of diabetes. Conducting additional studies will provide more concrete evidence and insights into how these components may influence diabetes and contribute to effective dietary strategies for diabetes management.    Figure 2. Health promoting compounds found in potatoes and their potential roles in disease prevention   Imran S et al. (2025). Not Bot Horti Agrobo 53(1):14080  16       Satiety enhancer Foods with a high glycemic index (GI) have been claimed to decrease satiety and so promote obesity and overweight. Potatoes have a high GI in general, but they also supply numerous essential nutrients and are a vital dietary source worldwide (Leeman et al., 2018). Potatoes have a high satiety index, which means they can help keep you feeling full and satisfied, potentially reducing overall calorie consumption. A comparative study found that participants reported feeling less hungry (with a mean (SD) measurement of 263 (230) mm min) after consuming a meal with potatoes compared to meals with rice (374 (237) mm min) or pasta (444 (254) mm min). Additionally, after the potato meal, participants reported feeling fuller, content, and having a reduced desire to eat, as compared to their responses after consuming pasta and rice (p < 0.01 for all). These findings suggest that potatoes may have a greater satiating effect compared to rice and pasta. This suggests that potatoes may offer a greater sense of fullness and satisfaction despite their lower calorie density. (Zhang et al., 2018). A smaller portion decreases both the glycemic load (GI x grams’ accessible carbohydrate) and the calorie content of the meal. As previously mentioned, potatoes may be an appropriate food option for reducing energy intake while maintaining satiety and decreasing postprandial glycemia since less carbohydrate is taken (Anderson et al., 2013).    Metabolomic Biomarkers  Metabolomic studies may identify specific metabolites associated with potato consumption that could serve as biomarkers for assessing dietary intake and its effects on health outcomes. These biomarkers can be valuable in nutritional research and personalized nutrition. It’s worth noting that the metabolomic potential of potatoes in human health is an evolving field of research, and the results can vary depending on factors like potato variety, preparation methods, and individual metabolism (Figure 3). Additionally, the interaction between potato consumption and overall dietary patterns plays a crucial role in determining its health effects. Therefore, more research is needed to fully understand the metabolomic intricacies of potato consumption and its impact on human health.   Figure 3. Dietary phytochemicals and their metabolite, impact on metabolism and health Imran S et al. (2025). Not Bot Horti Agrobo 53(1):14080  17       Versatility  Potatoes can be prepared in a wide variety of ways, from baking and boiling to roasting and mashing. This versatility makes it easy to incorporate them into a balanced diet. Potatoes are versatile since they can be cooked, fried, steamed, roasted baked, and even pressed into French fries, chips, flakes, cubes, dumpling, flour, canned potatoes, and so on (Kulshrestha et al., 2017).  Tuber quality attributes suitable to certain cooking or processing activities (boiling, frying, dehydration and baking etc.)  can be used to classify varieties. These can be further subdivided. In case, cultivars suitable for frying are classified as chipped (round) or French fry (elongate)(Camire et al., 2009). However, it's essential to consider how potatoes are prepared and consumed. While plain boiled or baked potatoes are relatively healthy, deep-frying them into French fries or covering them in high-fat toppings can negate some of their health benefits and contribute to unhealthy eating habits. Potato flour is a versatile raw material that can be used in a variety of ways (Table 4). Two Mauritian varieties were floured and used to make gulab jamuns, mash, and paratha, three classic Mauritian dishes (Kulkarni et al., 1996).   Table 4. Products prepared from Solanum tuberosum L. Product Objective Description References Potato flour Bakery product (Biscuit) Thermal treatment of SP flour was performed, and dough properties as well as final bread quality were investigated, considering mixes with wheat flour Rowayshed et al., 2015 Potatoes peeled powder Cake, bread Peel powders high in fiber and protein were mixed into cakes, improving nutritional value (increased fiber content) and texture (decreased cake hardness) Jeddou et al., 2017 Potatoes Snack Snack, chips Extruded products were fortified with protein, fiber, and beneficial substances. The acrylamide precursors in fried purple SP were investigated. The effect of frying oil unsaturation and its effect on acrylamide production was examined Lee and Shim, 2007  Potatoes are incredibly versatile, and their products have a wide range of commercial applications. Here are some of the most common potato products and their commercial uses.  Fresh potatoes Fresh potatoes are sold in various sizes and are used in a wide range of culinary applications, including baking, boiling, mashing, and frying. They are a staple in many dishes and are available in different varieties (Pedreschi et al., 2007).  French fries French fries are one of the most popular potato products in the world. They are widely available in fast-food restaurants and as frozen products in grocery stores. The commercial production of frozen French fries involves cutting, blanching, frying, and freezing the potatoes (Arsalan et al., 2018).  Potato chips  Potato chips, or crisps, are a common snack food. They are thinly sliced potatoes that are deep-fried and seasoned. The commercial production of potato chips involves slicing, frying, and flavoring the chips (Pedreschi et al., 2007; Arsalan et al., 2018).     Imran S et al. (2025). Not Bot Horti Agrobo 53(1):14080  18       Dehydrated potato products Dehydrated potato products include potato flakes, granules, and powder. These products are used in instant mashed potatoes, soups, and various processed foods. Dehydration extends shelf life and reduces transportation costs (Pedresch, 2009).  Potato starch Potato starch is used in the food industry for its thickening and binding properties. It's also used in non-food applications, such as in the textile and paper industries (Dupuis and Liu 2019).  Potato flour Potato flour is a gluten-free alternative to wheat flour and is used in gluten-free baking and cooking. It's also used in some processed foods (Kulkarni et al., 1996). Potato dumplings  Potato dumplings are a traditional food product made from mashed potatoes and are popular in various cuisines. They are often commercially produced and sold in grocery stores (Jiang et al., 2018).  Potato-based snacks Besides traditional chips, there are various potato-based snacks, such as tater tots, hash browns, and potato wedges, which are often available in commercial food service and retail settings (Sman and Broeze, 2013).  Potato bread Potato bread is made by incorporating potato into the bread dough, which results in a softer, moister bread with a longer shelf life. It's available in many bakeries and supermarkets (Ijah et al., 2014).   Potato vodka Potatoes can be used to make vodka. Some brands produce premium potato vodkas, often associated with a smoother and creamier taste compared to grain-based vodkas (Wisniewska et al., 2015; Menezes et al., 2017).  Animal feed  Potatoes that don't meet human consumption standards due to size, shape, or blemishes can be processed into animal feed, reducing food waste (Li et al., 2015).  Alcohol production Potatoes can be used to produce alcoholic beverages like potato wine and some traditional liquors in certain regions (Arapoglou et al., 2010).  Biodegradable plastics Plant proteins can also be used to make bioplastics, which are excellent for food packaging, film manufacturing, and medical uses. Potato starch and protein have been used in the production of biodegradable plastics, which are environmentally friendly and used in various applications (Priedniece et al., 2017).  Medicinal products Some pharmaceuticals use potato starch as a filler or binder in tablet production. The majority of phenolic compounds (up to 90%) are chlorogenic acid, which is not particularly valuable on its own but can be Imran S et al. (2025). Not Bot Horti Agrobo 53(1):14080  19       hydrolyzed into quinic and caffeic acids. it has significant antibacterial properties whereas quinic acid is a raw ingredient used in the synthesis of various drugs (Freidman, 2006; Priedniece et al., 2017). Starch has the potential to be employed in nanotechnologies and is a popular material when producing medical devices and nanotubes. Other uses for starch in the pharmaceutical industry include binders, fillers, various coatings, capsules, decomposable substrate, implant, former, and biotechnologies, which can use starch derivatives (non-ionic and ionic compounds) obtained through different chemical modifications (Lu et al., 2009).  Horticultural uses  Potatoes can be used for growing seed potatoes, which are then sold to farmers for planting in subsequent seasons.   Advance Formulation in Field of Nanotechnology   Metallic nanoparticles are the most promising; they have good antibacterial capabilities due to their high surface-area-to-volume ratio. Which is of great interest to researchers due to rising microbial resistance to metal ions, antibiotics, and the emergence of resistant strains (Mba and Nweze, 2021).  Silver nanoparticles are commonly utilized in the medical profession as anti-microbial agents due to their powerful growth inhibitory effects against fungi, bacteria, and viruses, as well as their low toxicity to human cells. These nanoparticles have found use in food storage, textile coatings, and water remediation (Rai et al., 2009). Green synthesis methods were used to synthesize Ag nanoparticles from extracts of apples, oranges, potatoes, red pepper, white onion, garlic, and radish. The antibacterial characteristics of the nanoparticles were tested against Staphylococcus aureus, Bacillus cereus, Escherichia coli, and Candida krusei. Plant extracts offer silver nanoparticles particular features, although the highest antibacterial properties indicate nanoparticles formed in the presence of potato extract (Wasilewska et al., 2023). Selenium nanoparticles, which are also known to possess antioxidant, antimicrobial activity, were also synthesized from using potatoes extract. Selenium nanoparticles are commonly employed in medical applications such as drug delivery. The antioxidant activity of Hallow selenium nanoparticles (hSeNPs) was shown to be concentration-dependent. The hSeNPs were effective against both gram-positive Bacillus subtilis and gram-negative Escherichia coli. According to the findings of this study, potato extract lessens the toxicity of hSeNPs, and lower doses of hSeNPs could be used for a variety of biological applications in the near future. (Chandramohan et al., 2019). Starch nanoparticles were synthesized using potato peel extract. These assessed against antioxidant activity and showed promising results (Hasanin, 2021). Starch capped silver nanoparticles were synthesized by using aqueous extract of potatoes. Starch-capped AgNPs exhibit antibacterial activity against E. coli and S. aureus. The minimum inhibitory concentrations for E. coli and S. aureus were determined to be 6.4 g/ml and 8.2 g/ml, respectively. The specific metal binding capacity of cysteine is responsible for the reduction of adsorbed Ag+ onto the surface of silver nanoparticles in the protein cell wall (Khan and Al-Thabaiti 2019).    Toxicology Studies   Although natural substances derived from plants have successfully led to the development of key medications that are still used to treat a variety of diseases, many herbal products are inadequately studied or monitored, if at all, for their efficacy and safety. Plants as therapeutic medications are not as safe as promised, and some medicinal herbs may have negative side effects. As a result, it is critical that toxicological studies be conducted and that proper information on the hazards connected with the use of these products be supplied to customers (Oyedepo et al., 2021). Heat-inducing interactions between the amino group of the amino acid Imran S et al. (2025). Not Bot Horti Agrobo 53(1):14080  20       asparagine and the carbonyl groups of glucose and fructose in plant-derived foods such as potatoes, produce potentially lethal acrylamide (Friedman, 2015). According to the American Cancer Society, acrylamide is generated when starchy foods such as potatoes and potato products are cooked at temperatures above 121 degrees Celsius. Deep frying at 170 °C, on the other hand, is known to efficiently cut the level of hazardous chemicals, whilst microwaving is only marginally effective, and freeze-drying or dehydration has no effect. Acrylamide levels are higher in CHO-rich foods like potato chips and French fries. Potatoes also contain poisonous chemicals known to cause poisoning, such as α-solanine and α-chaconine (Figure 4). These toxins produce gastrointestinal upset, resulting in vomiting and diarrhea, but severe poisoning can result in paralysis, heart failure, and coma. Green spots in potatoes containing chlorophyll are safe, although they signal the presence of toxins (Gupta and Gupta, 2019).   Figure 4. Chemical structure of poisonous chemicals presents in potatoes, known to cause poisoning, such as α-chaconine, α-solanine and acrylamide   Conclusions  Potato is one of the world's record essential staple food crops, including a variety of biologically active compounds carbohydrates, protein, lipids, and vitamins as well as phytochemicals like phenolic acids, carotenoids, anthocyanins, and flavonoids. Peels of potato are widely available and contain a diverse range of chemicals that could be employed in both food and non-food applications.  Potatoes have proven to be useful in the food industry, medicinal uses, and packaging. Anthocyanins, polyphenols are the key pigments responsible for the in colored fleshed potatoes, have been recognized for their contributions to health due to their significant antioxidative activity, and anti-stomach cancer action. These phytochemicals, together with other critical nutrients have been demonstrated in both in vitro and in vivo tests to be more powerful antioxidants. So far, research has shown that potato phytochemicals have powerful anti-cancer, antidiabetics, antihypertensive, and GI reducing properties. The scientific community must promote greater phytochemical and pharmacological consideration of potatoes and their potent therapeutic activity, which would be significant in lowering the risks of tumors, diabetes, and cardiovascular disease.  Looking ahead, more research is needed to fully understand the health benefits of potato phytochemicals, focusing on their absorption and effects in the body. Clinical studies should explore how these compounds work to fight diseases, while breeding programs can develop potato varieties with enhanced nutritional properties. There is also great potential to use potato waste in eco-friendly products, helping to reduce waste. With further exploration, potatoes can play a larger role in both improving human health and supporting sustainable industries.   Imran S et al. (2025). Not Bot Horti Agrobo 53(1):14080  21       Authors’ Contributions   Conceptualization: YZ, XH, AQ, XY, YB; acquisition of data, analysis, interpretation of data, writing - original draft: SI, AQ, YB, XY; Writing - review and editing: LY, XP, XL, JY. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.   Ethical approval (for researches involving animals or humans)  Not applicable.  Acknowledgements  This work was supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2022YFD1100402).   Conflict of Interests  The authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest related to this article.   References  Aksoy E, Demirel U, Bakhsh A, Zia MAB, Naeem M, Saeed F, ... Çalışkan ME (2021). Recent advances in potato (Solanum tuberosum L.) breeding. Advances in Plant Breeding Strategies: Vegetable Crops: Volume 8: Bulbs, Roots and Tubers 409-487. Al Sinani SSS, Eltayeb EA (2017). The steroidal glycoalkaloids solamargine and solasonine in Solanum plants. South African Journal of Botany 112:253-269. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sajb.2017.06.002  Anderson GH, Soeandy CD, Smith CE (2013). White vegetables: Glycemia and satiety. Advances in Nutrition 4:356S-367S. https://doi.org/10.3945/an.112.003509  Andre CM, Oufir M, Guignard C, Hoffmann L, Hausman JF, Evers D, Larondelle Y (2007). Antioxidant profiling of native Andean potato tubers (Solanum tuberosum L.) reveals cultivars with high levels of β-carotene, α-tocopherol, chlorogenic acid, and petanin. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 55(26):10839-10849. https://doi.org/10.1021/jf0726583  Arapoglou D, Varzakas T, Vlyssides A, Israilides CJWM (2010). Ethanol production from potato peel waste (PPW). Waste Management 30(10):1898-1902. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2010.04.017  Arslan M, Xiaobo Z, Shi J, Rakha A, Hu X, Zareef M, Basheer S (2018). Oil uptake by potato chips or French fries: A review. European Journal of Lipid Science and Technology 120(10):1800058. https://doi.org/10.1002/ejlt.201800058  Bassoli BK, Cassolla P, Borba-Murad GR, Constantin J, Salgueiro-Pagadigorria CL, Bazotte R, (2008).  Chlorogenic acid reduces the plasma glucose peak in the oral glucose tolerance test: effects on hepatic glucose release and glycaemia. Cell Biochemistry and Function 26:320-328. https://doi.org/10.1002/cbf.1444  Beals Katherine A (2019). Potatoes, nutrition and health. American Journal of Potato Research 96:102-110. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12230-018-09705-4  Bibi S, Navarre DA, Sun X, Du M, Rasco B,  Zhu  MJ (2019). Beneficial effect of potato consumption on gut microbiota and intestinal epithelial health. American Journal of Potato Research 96:170-176. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12230-018-09706-3  Birt DF, Boylston T, Hendrich S, Jane JL, Hollis J, Li L, Whitley EM (2013). Resistant starch: promise for improving human health. Advances in Nutrition 4(6):587-601. https://doi.org/10.3945/an.113.004325  Imran S et al. (2025). Not Bot Horti Agrobo 53(1):14080  22       Blessington T, Nzaramba MN, Scheuring DC, Hale AL, Reddivari L, Miller JC (2010). Cooking methods and storage treatments of potato: Effects on carotenoids, antioxidant activity, and phenolics. American Journal of Potato Research 87:479-491. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12230-010-9150-7  Boeing H, Bechthold A, Bub A, Ellinger S, Haller D, Kroke A, … Watzl B (2012). Critical review: vegetables and fruit in the prevention of chronic diseases. European Journal of Nutrition 51:637-663. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00394-012-0380-y  Bohn T (2017). Carotenoids, chronic disease prevention and dietary recommendations. International Journal of Vitamin and Nutrition Research 87(3-4):121-130. https://doi.org/10.1024/0300-9831/a000525  Bonierbale M, Zapata GB, zum Felde T, Sosa P (2010). Composition nutritionnelle des pommes de terre. Cahiers de Nutrition et de Diététique 45(6):S28-S36. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0007-9960(10)70005-5  Bontempo P, Carafa V, Grassi R, Basile A, Tenore GC, Formisano C, ... Altucci L (2013). Antioxidant, antimicrobial and anti-proliferative activities of Solanum tuberosum L. var. Vitelotte. Food and Chemical Toxicology 55:304-312. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fct.2012.12.048  Borgi L,  Rimm EB, Willett WC,   Forman JP (2016). Potato intake and incidence of hypertension: Results from three prospective US cohort studies. The British Medical Journal 353. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.i2351  Bradshaw JE (2019). Improving the nutritional value of potatoes by conventional breeding and genetic modification. Quality Breeding in Field Crops 41-84. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-04609-5_3  Brown CR (2008).  Breeding for phytonutrient enhancement of potato. American Journal of Potato Research 85:298-307. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12230-008-9028-0  Burgos G,  Salas E, Amoros W, Auqui M,  Munoa, L,  Kimura M, Bonierbale M (2009). Total and individual carotenoid profiles in Solanum phureja of cultivated potatoes: I. Concentrations and relationships as determined by spectrophotometry and HPLC. Journal of Food Composition and Analysis 22:503-508. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfca.2008.08.008  Burgos G, Amoros W, Morote M, Stangoulis J,  Bonierbale M (2007). Iron and zinc concentration of native Andean potato cultivars from a human nutrition perspective. Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture 87(4):668-675. https://doi.org/10.1002/jsfa.2765  Burgos G, Amoros W, Munoa L, Sosa P,  Cayhualla E, Sanchez C, Díaz C, Bonierbale M (2013). Total phenolic, total anthocyanin and phenolic acid concentrations and antioxidant activity of purple-fleshed potatoes as affected by boiling. Journal of Food Composition and Analysis 30:6-12. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfca.2012.12.001  Burgos G, Zum Felde T,  Andre C,  Kubow S (2020). The potato and its contribution to the human diet and health. In: Campos H, Ortiz O (Eds). The Potato Crop. Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-28683-5_2  Burlingame B, Mouille B, Charrondiere R (2009). Nutrients, bioactive non-nutrients and anti-nutrients in potatoes. Journal of Food Composition and Analysis 22(6): 494-502. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfca.2009.09.001  Camire M E, Kubow S, Donnelly DJ (2009). Potatoes and human health. Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition 49(10):823-840. https://doi.org/10.1080/10408390903041996  Chandramohan S, Sundar K, Muthukumaran A (2019). Hollow selenium nanoparticles from potato extract and investigation of its biological properties and developmental toxicity in zebrafish embryos. IET Nanobiotechnology 13(3):275-281. https://doi.org/10.1049/iet-nbt.2018.5228  Charepalli V,  Reddivari L. Radhakrishnan S,  Vadde R, Agarwal R,  Vanamala JK (2015). Anthocyanin-containing purple-fleshed potatoes suppress colon tumorigenesis via elimination of colon cancer stem cells. The Journal of Nutritional Biochemistry 26(12):1641-1649. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnutbio.2015.08.005  Chen W, Hira T, Nakajima S, Tomozawa H, Tsubata M, Yamaguchi K (2012). Suppressive effect on food intake of a potato extract (Potein®) involving cholecystokinin release in rats. Bioscience Biotechnology Biochemistry 76:1104-1109. https://doi.org/10.1271/bbb.110936  Chitchumroonchokchai C, Diretto G, Parisi B, Giuliano G, Failla ML (2017). Potential of golden potatoes to improve vitamin A and vitamin E status in developing countries. PLoS One 12(11):e0187102. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0187102  De Haan S, Burgos G, Liria R, Rodriguez F, Creed-Kanashiro HM,  Bonierbale M (2019). The nutritional contribution of potato varietal diversity in Andean food systems: a case study. American Journal of Potato Research 96:151-163. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12230-018-09707-2 Imran S et al. (2025). Not Bot Horti Agrobo 53(1):14080  23       de Pascual-Teresa S, Sanchez-Ballesta MT (2008). Anthocyanins: from plant to health. Phytochemistry Reviews 7:281-299. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11101-007-9074-0  Dong X, Sun S, Wang X, Yu H, Dai K, Jiao J, ... Peng L (2024). Structural characteristics and intestinal flora metabolism mediated immunoregulatory effects of Lactarius deliciosus polysaccharide. International Journal of Biological Macromolecules 278:135063. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2024.135063 Dupuis JH, Liu Q (2019). Potato starch: A review of physicochemical, functional and nutritional properties. American Journal of Potato Research 96(2): 127-138. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12230-018-09696-2  Elsharif A A, Dheir IM, Mettleq ASA, Abu-Naser SS (2020). Potato classification using deep learning. International Journal of Academic Pedagogical Research 3(12):1-8. Ercoli S, Cartes J, Cornejo P, Tereucán G, Winterhalter P, Contreras B, Ruiz A (2021). Stability of phenolic compounds, antioxidant activity and colour parameters of a coloured extract obtained from coloured-flesh potatoes. LWT- Food Science and Technology 136:110370. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lwt.2020.110370  Ezekiel R, Singh N, Sharma S, Kaur A (2013). Beneficial phytochemicals in potato-A review. Food Research International 50(2):487-496. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodres.2011.04.025  Foltz M, Ansems P, Schwarz J, Tasker MC, Lourbakos A, Gerhardt CC (2008). Protein hydrolysates induce CCK release from enteroendocrine cells and act as partial agonists of the CCK1 receptor. Journal of Agriculture Food Chemistry 56:837-843. https://doi.org/10.1021/jf072611h  Friedman M (2006). Potato glycoalkaloids and metabolites: roles in the plant and in the diet. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 54(23):8655-8681. https://doi.org/10.1021/jf061471t  Friedman M (2015). Chemistry and anticarcinogenic mechanisms of glycoalkaloids produced by eggplants, potatoes, and tomatoes. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 63(13):3323-3337. Friedman M, Lee KR, Kim HJ, Lee IS, Kozukue N (2005). Anticarcinogenic effects of glycoalkaloids from potatoes against human cervical, liver, lymphoma, and stomach cancer cells. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 53(15):6162-6169. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jafc.5b00818  Friedman M, McDonald GM, Filadelfi-Keszi, M (1997). Potato glycoalkaloids: chemistry, analysis, safety, and plant physiology. Critical Reviews in Plant Sciences 16(1):55-132. Fudge J, Mangel N, Gruissem W, Vanderschuren H, Fitzpatrick TB (2017). Rationalising vitamin B6 biofortification in crop plants. Current Opinion in Biotechnology 44:130-137. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.copbio.2016.12.004  Furrer AN, Chegeni M, Ferruzzi MG (2018). Impact of potato processing on nutrients, phytochemicals, and human health. Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition 58(1):146-168. https://doi.org/10.1080/10408398.2016.1139542  Gao T, Liao W, Lin L, Zhu Z, Lu M, Fu C,  Xie T (2022). Curcumae rhizoma and its major constituents against hepatobiliary disease: Pharmacotherapeutic properties and potential clinical applications. Phytomedicine 102:154090. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.phymed.2022.154090 Gibson S, Kurilich A (2013) The nutritional value of potatoes and potato products in the UK diet.  Nutrition Bulletin 38: 389–399. https://doi.org/10.1111/nbu.12057   Gibson S, Kurilich A (2013). The nutritional value of potatoes and potato products in the UK diet.  Nutrition Bulletin 38: 389–399. https://doi.org/10.1111/nbu.12057  Giusti MM, Polit MF, Ayvaz H, Tay D, Manrique I (2014). Characterization and quantitation of anthocyanins and other phenolics in native Andean potatoes. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 62(19):4408-4416. https://doi.org/10.1021/jf500655n  Głosek-Sobieraj M, Wierzbowska J, Cwalina-Ambroziak B, Waśkiewicz A (2022). Protein and sugar content of tubers in potato plants treated with biostimulants. Journal of Plant Protection Research 62(4):370-384. https://doi.org/10.24425/jppr.2022.143227  Gnanasekaran CG, Basalingappa KM (2018). Solanum tuberosum L.: Botanical, Phytochemical, pharmacological and Nutritional significance. International Journal of Phytomedicine 10(3):115-124. https://ijp.arjournals.org/index.php/ijp/article/view/598  Grunenfelder LA, Knowles LO, Hiller LK, Knowles NR (2006). Glycoalkaloid development during greening of fresh market potatoes (Solanum tuberosum L.). Journal of Agriculture and   Food Chemistry 54:5847-5854. https://doi.org/10.1021/jf0607359  Imran S et al. (2025). Not Bot Horti Agrobo 53(1):14080  24       Gupta UC, Gupta SC (2019). The important role of potatoes, an underrated vegetable food crop in human health and nutrition. Current Nutrition and Food Science 15(1):11-19. https://doi.org/10.2174/1573401314666180906113417  Hasanin MS (2021). Simple, economic, ecofriendly method to extract starch nanoparticles from potato peel waste for biological applications. Starch‐Stärke 73:2100055. https://doi.org/10.1002/star.202100055  Hassan SH, Gul S, Zahra HS, Maryam A, Shakir HA, Khan M, Irfan M (2021). Alpha solanine: A novel natural bioactive molecule with anticancer effects in multiple human malignancies. Nutrition and Cancer 73(9):1541-1552. https://doi.org/10.1080/01635581.2020.1803932  Hayashi K, Hibasami H, Murakami T, Terahara N, Mori M,  Tsukui A (2006). Induction of apoptosis in cultured human stomach cancer cells by potato anthocyanins and its inhibitory effects on growth of stomach cancer in mice. Food Science and Technology Research 12(1):22-26. https://doi.org/10.3136/fstr.12.22  Ijah UJJ, Auta HS, Aduloju MO, Aransiolo SA (2014). Microbiological, nutritional, and sensory quality of bread produced from wheat and potato flour blends. International Journal of Food Science 2014:671701. https://doi.org/10.1155/2014/671701  Jansky S, Navarre R, Bamberg J (2019). Introduction to the special issue on the nutritional value of potato. American Journal of Potato Research 96:95-97. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12230-018-09708-1  Jeddou KB, Bouaziz F, Zouari-Ellouzi S, Chaari F, Ellouz-Chaabouni S, Ellouz-Ghorbel R, Nouri-Ellouz O (2017). Improvement of texture and sensory properties of cakes by addition of potato peel powder with high level of dietary fiber and protein. Food Chemistry 217:668-677. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2016.08.081  Jiang C, Sun T, Xiang D, Wei S, Li W (2018). Anticancer activity and mechanism of xanthohumol: a prenylated flavonoid from hops (Humulus lupulus L.). Frontiers in Pharmacology 9:530. https://doi.org/10.3389/fphar.2018.00530 Jiang Y, Zhao Y, Wang  D,  Deng Y (2018). Influence of the addition of potato, okara, and konjac flours on antioxidant activity, digestibility, and quality of dumpling wrappers. Journal of Food Quality https://doi.org/10.1155/2018/4931202  Jiao J, Xu JY, Zhang W, Han S, Qin LQ (2015). Effect of dietary fiber on circulating C-reactive protein in overweight and obese adults: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. International Journal of Food Sciences and Nutrition 66(1): 114-119. https://doi.org/10.3109/09637486.2014.959898  Kalita D, Holm DG, LaBarbera DV, Petrash JM,  Jayanty SS (2018). Inhibition of α-glucosidase, α-amylase, and aldose reductase by potato polyphenolic compounds. PloS one, 13(1): e0191025. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0191025  Karenlampi SO, White PJ (2009). Potato proteins, lipids, and minerals. In: Advances in potato chemistry and technology, pp 99-125. Academic Press. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-374349-7.00005-2  Karim Z, Holmes M,  Orfila C (2017). Inhibitory effect of chlorogenic acid on digestion of potato starch. Food Chemistry 217:498-504. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2016.08.058  Karim ZM (2016). Relationship between phenolic content of potato and digestion of carbohydrate in vitro and in vivo. Doctoral dissertation, University of Leeds. Kaspar KL, Park JS, Brown CR, Mathison BD, Navarre DA, Chew BP (2011). Pigmented potato consumption alters oxidative stress and inflammatory damage in men. The Journal of Nutrition 141(1):108-111. https://doi.org/10.3945/jn.110.128074  Keenan MJ, Zhou J, Hegsted M (2015). Role of resistant starch in improving gut health, adiposity, and insulin resistance. Advance in Nutrition 6:198-205. https://doi.org/10.3945/an.114.007419  Kenny OM, McCarthy CM, Brunton NP, Hossain MB, Rai D K, Collins SG ...  O'Brien NM (2013). Anti-inflammatory properties of potato glycoalkaloids in stimulated Jurkat and Raw 264.7 mouse macrophages. Life Sciences 92(13):775-782. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lfs.2013.02.006  Khan Z, Al-Thabaiti SA (2019). Biogenic silver nanoparticles: Green synthesis, encapsulation, thermal stability and antimicrobial activities. Journal of Molecular Liquids 289:111102.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molliq.2019.111102  Kimura I, Inoue D, Hirano K (2014) The SCFA receptor GPR43 and energy metabolism. Frontiers in Endocrinology. https://doi.org/10.3389/fendo.2014.00085  King JC, Slavin JL (2013). White potatoes, human health, and dietary guidance. Advances in Nutrition 4(3):393S-401S. https://doi.org/10.3945/an.112.003525  Imran S et al. (2025). Not Bot Horti Agrobo 53(1):14080  25       Kitabchi AE, Temprosa M, Knowler WC, Kahn SE, Fowler SE, Haffner SM....  Shamoon H (2005). Diabetes Prevention Program Research Group Role of insulin secretion and sensitivity in the evolution of type 2 diabetes in the diabetes prevention program: effects of lifestyle intervention and metformin. Diabetes 54(8):2404-2414. https://doi.org/10.2337/diabetes.54.8.2404  Komarnytsky S, Cook Raskin I (2011). Potato protease inhibitors inhibit food intake and increase circulating cholecystokinin levels by a trypsin-dependent mechanism. International Journal of Obesity 35:236-243. https://doi.org/10.1038/ijo.2010.192  Kowalczewski P, Celka K, Białas W, Lewandowicz G (2012). Antioxidant activity of potato juice. Acta Scientiarum  Polomorum Technologia Alimentaria 11(2):175-181. Kowalczewski PL, Olejnik A, Świtek S, Bzducha-Wróbel A, Kubiak P, Kujawska M, Lewandowicz G (2022). Bioactive compounds of potato (Solanum tuberosum L.) juice: From industry waste to food and medical applications. Critical Reviews in Plant Sciences 41(1):52-89. https://doi.org/10.1080/07352689.2022.2057749  Kubow S, Hobson L, Iskandar MM, Sabally K, Donnelly DJ, Agellon LB (2014). Extract of I rish potatoes (Solanum tuberosum L.) decreases body weight gain and adiposity and improves glucose control in the mouse model of diet‐induced obesity. Molecular Nutrition & Food Research 58(11):2235-2238. https://doi.org/10.1002/mnfr.201400013  Kubow S, Iskandar MM, Melgar-Bermudez E, Sleno L, Sabally K, Azadi B....  Zum Felde T (2017). Effects of simulated human gastrointestinal digestion of two purple-fleshed potato cultivars on anthocyanin composition and cytotoxicity in colonic cancer and non-tumorigenic cells. Nutrients 9(9):953. https://doi.org/10.3390/nu9090953  Kudo K, Onodera S, Takeda Y, Benkeblia N,  Shiomi N. (2009). Antioxidative activities of some peptides isolated from hydrolyzed potato protein extract. Journal of Functional Foods 1(2):170-176. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jff.2009.01.006  Kujawska M, Olejnik A, Lewandowicz G, Kowalczewski P, Forjasz R,  Jodynis-Liebert J (2018). Spray-dried potato juice as a potential functional food component with gastrointestinal protective effects. Nutrients 10(2):259. https://doi.org/10.3390/nu10020259  Kulkarni KD, Govinden N,  Kulkarni D (1996). Production and use of raw potato flour in Mauritian traditional foods. Food and Nutrition Bulletin 17(2): https://doi.org/10.1177/156482659601700210  Kulshrestha K, Pandey A (2017). Value addition of fruits and vegetables for nutritional security. International Journal of Food Science & Technology 7(2): 27-34. Lal MK, Kumar A, Jena R, Dutt S, Thakur N, Parmar V, ...  Singh B (2020). Lipids in potato. Potato: Nutrition and Food Security 73-85. Langner E, Rzeski W, Kaczor J, Kandefer-Szerszeń M, Pierzynowski SG (2009). Tumour cell growth-inhibiting properties of water extract isolated from heated potato fibre (Potex). Journal of Pre-Clinic and Clinical Research 3:36-41. Lee BM, Shim GA (2007). Dietary exposure estimation of benzo[a]pyrene and cancer risk assessment. Journal of Toxicology and Environmental Health, Part A 70:1391-1394. https://doi.org/10.1080/15287390701434182  Li  M, Wan Z,  Zou T, Shen Z, Li M, Wang C, ... Xiao X (2024). Artificial intelligence enabled self-powered wireless sensing for smart industry. Chemical Engineering Journal 492:152417. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2024.152417 Li Y, Kaur L, Singh J, Xu J, Zeng F (2023). Functional Food based on Potato. Food 12(11):2145. https://doi.org/10.3390/foods12112145  Li J, Chen Y, Zhang S, Zhao Y, Gao D, Xing J, ... Xu G (2025). Purslane (Portulaca oleracea L.) polysaccharide attenuates carbon tetrachloride-induced acute liver injury by modulating the gut microbiota in mice. Genomics 117(1):110983. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ygeno.2024.110983  Li S, Reddivari L (2021). Improvement of gut barrier function by potato anthocyanins is dependent on gut microbiota. Current Developments in Nutrition 5(2):344-344. https://doi.org/10.1093/cdn/nzab037_054  Li Y, Liu B, Song J, Jiang C, Yang Q (2015). Utilization of potato starch processing wastes to produce animal feed with high lysine content. Journal of Microbiology and Biotechnology 25(2):178-184. https://doi.org/10.4014/jmb.1404.04035  Li YD, Xu TC, Xiao JX, Zong AZ, Qiu B, Jia M, ...  Liu W (2018). Efficacy of potato resistant starch prepared by microwave–toughening treatment. Carbohydrate Polymers 192:299-307. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2018.03.076 Imran S et al. (2025). Not Bot Horti Agrobo 53(1):14080  26       Li Z, Xiang F, Huang X, Liang M, Ma S, Gafurov K,... Wang Q (2024). Properties and Characterization of Sunflower Seeds from Different Varieties of Edible and Oil Sunflower Seeds. Foods 13(8):1188. https://doi.org/10.3390/foods13081188 Liang M, Li T, Qu Y, Qin J, Li Z, Huang X,... Wang Q (2023). Mitigation mechanism of resveratrol on thermally induced trans-α-linolenic acid of trilinolenin. LWT-Food Science and Technology 189:115508. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lwt.2023.115508  Lin S, Singh RK, Moehninsi M,  Navarre DA (2021). R2R3-MYB transcription factors, StmiR858 and sucrose mediate potato flavonol biosynthesis. Horticulture Research 8:25. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41438-021-00463-9  Lippert E, Ruemmele P,  Obermeier F,  Goelder  S,  Kunst C,  Rogler G,  Dunger  N,  Messmann  H,  Hartmann A, Endlicher E (2017). Anthocyanins prevent colorectal cancer development in a mouse model. Digestion 95:275-280. https://doi.org/10.1159/000475524  Lister CE, Munro J (2000). Nutrition and health qualities of potatoes – a future focus. Crop & Food Research Confidential Report No. 143, New Zealand Institute for Crop & Food Research, Christchurch. Liu M, Li X, Zhou S, Wang TT, Zhou S, Yang K,… Wang J (2020). Dietary fiber isolated from sweet potato residues promotes a healthy gut microbiome profile. Food & Function 11(1):689-699. https://doi.org/10.1039/c9fo01009b  Lou J, Zhao L, Huang Z, Chen X, Xu J, Tai WC, … Xie T (2021). Ginkgetin derived from Ginkgo biloba leaves enhances the therapeutic effect of cisplatin via ferroptosis-mediated disruption of the Nrf2/HO-1 axis in EGFR wild-type non-small-cell lung cancer. Phytomedicine 80: 153370. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.phymed.2020.153370 Love SL, Pavek JJ (2008). Positioning the potato as a primary food source of vitamin C. American Journal of Potato Research 85: 277-285. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12230-008-9030-6  Lu DR,  Xiao CM, & Xu SJ (2009). Starch-based completely biodegradable polymer materials. Express Polymer Letters 3(6):366-375. Ma Q, Ma Z,  Wang W, Mu J, Liu Y, Wang J,... Sun J (2022). The effects of enzymatic modification on the functional Ingredient-Dietary fiber extracted from potato residue. LWT 153:112511. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lwt.2021.112511  Madiwale GP, Reddivari L, Holm DG, Vanamala J (2011). Storage elevates phenolic content and antioxidant activity but suppresses antiproliferative and pro-apoptotic properties of colored-flesh potatoes against human colon cancer cell lines. Journal of Agriculture Food Chemistry 59:8155-8166. https://doi.org/10.1021/jf201073g  Maki KC, Phillips AK (2015).  Dietary substitutions for refined carbohydrate that show promise for reducing risk of type 2 diabetes in men and women. Journal of Nutrition 145:159S-163S. https://doi.org/10.3945/jn.114.195149  Manach C, Scalbert A, Morand C, Remesy C, Jiménez L (2018). Polyphenols: Food sources and bioavailability. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 79:727-747. https://doi.org/10.1093/ajcn/79.5.727  Mattila P, Hellström J (2007). Phenolic acids in potatoes, vegetables, and some of their products. Journal of Food Composition and Analysis 20(3-4): 152-160. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfca.2006.05.007  Mba IE, Nweze EI (2021). Nanoparticles as therapeutic options for treating multidrug-resistant bacteria: Research progress, challenges, and prospects. World Journal of Microbiology and Biotechnology 37:1-30. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11274-021-03070-x  McGill CR, Kurilich AC, Davignon J (2013). The role of potatoes and potato components in cardiometabolic health: a review. Annals of Medicine 45(7):467-473. https://doi.org/10.3109/07853890.2013.813633  Menezes AGT, Menezes EGT, Alves JGL F, Rodrigues LF,  Cardoso MDG (2016). Vodka production from potato (Solanum tuberosum L.) using three Saccharomyces cerevisiae isolates. Journal of the Institute of Brewing 122(1):76-83. https://doi.org/10.1002/jib.302  Mills CE, Tzounis X, Oruna-Concha MJ, Mottram DS, Gibson GR, Spencer JP (2015). In vitro colonic metabolism of coffee and chlorogenic acid results in selective changes in human faecal microbiota growth. British Journal of Nutrition 113(8):1220-1227. https://doi.org/10.1017/s0007114514003948  Mishra T, Raigond P, Thakur N, Dutt S, Singh B (2020). Recent updates on healthy phytoconstituents in potato: A nutritional depository. Potato Research 63(3): 323–343. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11540-019-09442-z  Mooney S, Chen L, Kuhn C, Navarre R, Knowles NR, Hellmann H (2013). Genotype-specific changes in vitamin B 6 content and the PDX family in potato. Biomedical Research International 1:389723. https://doi.org/10.1155/2013/389723  Imran S et al. (2025). Not Bot Horti Agrobo 53(1):14080  27       Mushinskiy AA, Aminova EV, Fedotova LS, Dergileva TT (2021). Evaluation of potato tubers of Nevsky variety and selection hybrids by amino acid composition. In IOP Conference Series: Earth and Environmental Science 624(1):012155. https://doi.org/10.1088/1755-1315/624/1/012155  Nassar AM, Sabally K, Kubow S, Leclerc YN, Donnelly DJ (2012). Some Canadian-grown potato cultivars contribute to a substantial content of essential dietary minerals. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 60(18):4688-4696. https://doi.org/10.1021/jf204940t  Neela S, Fanta SW (2019). Review on nutritional composition of orange‐fleshed sweet potato and its role in management of vitamin A deficiency. Food Science & Nutrition 7(6):1920-1945. https://doi.org/10.1002/fsn3.1063  Nogawa T, Futamura Y, Okano A, Suto M, Nakamura J, Ishihara K,  Osada H (2019). Construction of a potato fraction library for the investigation of functional secondary metabolites. Bioscience, Biotechnology, and Biochemistry 83(1):65-75. https://doi.org/10.1080/09168451.2018.1525273  Oh YS, Bae GD, Baek DJ (2018). Fatty acid-induced lipotoxicity in pancreatic beta-cells during development of type 2 diabetes. Frontiers in Endocrinology 9: 384. https://doi.org/10.3389/fendo.2018.00384  Olthof MR, Hollman PC, Buijsman MN, Van Amelsvoort JM, Katan MB (2003). Chlorogenic acid, quercetin-3-rutinoside and black tea phenols are extensively metabolized in humans. The Journal of Nutrition 133(6): 1806-1814. https://doi.org/10.1093/jn/133.6.1806  Ombra MN, Fratianni F, Granese T, Cardinale F, Cozzolino A,  Nazzaro F (2015). In vitro antioxidant, antimicrobial and anti-proliferative activities of purple potato extracts (Solanum tuberosum cv Vitelotte noire) following simulated gastro-intestinal digestion. Natural Product Research 29(11):1087-1091. https://doi.org/10.1080/14786419.2014.981183  Oyedepo TA, Palai S (2021). Herbal remedies, toxicity, and regulations. In: Preparation of Phytopharmaceuticals for the Management of Disorders 89-127. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-820284-5.00014-9  Parr AJ, Mellon FA, Colquhoun IJ, Davies HV (2005). Dihydrocaffeoyl polyamines (kukoamine and allies) in potato (Solanum tuberosum) tubers detected during metabolite profiling. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 53(13): 5461-5466. https://doi.org/10.1021/jf050298i  Pedreschi F (2009). Fried and dehydrated potato products. In: Advances in Potato Chemistry and Technology, pp 319-337. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-374349-7.00011-8  Pedreschi F, Moyano P, Santis N, Pedreschi R (2007). Physical properties of pre-treated potato chips. Journal of Food Engineering 79(4):1474-1482. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfoodeng.2006.04.029  Peng J, Ge C, Shang K, Liu S, Jiang Y (2024). Comprehensive profiling of the chemical constituents in Dayuanyin decoction using UPLC-QTOF-MS combined with molecular networking. Pharmaceutical Biology 62(1):480-498. https://doi.org/10.1080/13880209.2024.2354341 Peng Z, Cheng L, Meng K, Shen Y, Wu D,  Shu X (2022). Retaining a large amount of resistant starch in cooked potato through microwave heating after freeze-drying. Current Research in Food Science 5:1660-1667. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.crfs.2022.09.023  Pihlanto A, Akkanen S, Korhonen HJ (2008). ACE-inhibitory and antioxidant properties of potato (Solanum tuberosum). Food Chemistry 109:104-112. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2007.12.023  Pouvreau L, Gruppen H, Piersma SR, van den Broek LA, van Koningsveld GA, Voragen AG (2001). Relative abundance and inhibitory distribution of protease inhibitors in potato juice from cv. Elkana. Journal of Agriculture Food Chemistry 49:2864-2874. https://doi.org/10.1021/jf010126v  Priedniece V, Spalvins K, Ivanovs K, Pubule J, Blumberga D (2017). Bioproducts from potatoes. A review. Rigas Tehniskas Universitates Zinatniskie Raksti 21(1):18-27. https://doi.org/10.1515/rtuect-2017-0013   Raatz SK, Idso L, Johnson LK, Jackson MI, Combs Jr GF (2016). Resistant starch analysis of commonly consumed potatoes: Content varies by cooking method and service temperature but not by variety. Food Chemistry 208:297-300. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2016.03.120  Rai M, Yadav A, Gade A (2009).  Silver nanoparticles as a new generation of antimicrobials. Biotechnology Advance 27: 76–83. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biotechadv.2008.09.002  Raigond P, Jayanty SS, Parmar V, Dutt S, Changan SS, Luthra SK, Singh B (2023). Health-Promoting Compounds. In: Potatoes: Tuber Exhibiting Great Potential for Human Health. Food Chemistry 136368. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2023.136368  Imran S et al. (2025). Not Bot Horti Agrobo 53(1):14080  28       Ramadan M, Oraby H (2016). Fatty acids and bioactive lipids of potato cultivars: an overview.  Journal of Oleo Science 65(6):459-470. https://doi.org/10.5650/jos.ess16015  Rasheed H, Ahmad D, Bao J (2022). Genetic diversity and health properties of polyphenols in potato. Antioxidants 11(4):603. https://doi.org/10.3390/antiox11040603  Reddivari L, Wang T,  Wu B,  Li S (2019). Potato: An anti-inflammatory food. American Journal of Potato Research 96:164-169. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12230-018-09699-z  Reddivari L, Vanamala J, Safe SH  Miller JC (2010). The bioactive compounds α-chaconine and gallic acid in potato extracts decrease survival and induce apoptosis in LNCaP and PC3 prostate cancer cells. Nutrition and Cancer 62:601-610. https://doi.org/10.1080/01635580903532358  Robert L, Narcy A, Rock E, Demigne C, Mazur A, Rémésy C. (2006).  Entire potato consumption improves lipid metabolism and antioxidant status in cholesterol-fed rat. European Journal of Nutrition 45:267-274. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00394-006-0594-y  Robertson TM, Alzaabi AZ, Robertson MD, Fielding BA (2018). Starchy carbohydrates in a healthy diet: the role of the humble potato. Nutrients 10(11):1764. https://doi.org/10.3390/nu10111764  Rowayshed G, Sharaf AM, El-Faham SY, Ashour M, Zaky AA (2015). Utilization of potato peels extract as source of phytochemicals in biscuits. Journal of Basic and Applied Research International 8(3):190-201. Ru W, Pang Y, Gan Y, Liu Q, Bao J (2019). Phenolic compounds and antioxidant activities of potato cultivars with white, yellow, red and purple flesh. Antioxidants 8(10):419. https://doi.org/10.3390/antiox8100419  Samaniego I, Espin S, Cuesta X, Arias V, Rubio A, Llerena W, ...  Carrillo W (2020). Analysis of environmental conditions effect in the phytochemical composition of potato (Solanum tuberosum) cultivars. Plants 9(7):815. https://doi.org/10.3390/plants9070815  Sanders LM, Dicklin MR, Palacios OM, Maki CE, Wilcox ML, Maki KC (2021). Effects of potato resistant starch intake on insulin sensitivity, related metabolic markers and appetite ratings in men and women at risk for type 2 diabetes: a pilot cross‐over randomised controlled trial. Journal of Human Nutrition and Dietetics 34(1):94-105. https://doi.org/10.1111/jhn.12822  Sawicka B, Gupta PD (2018). Resistant starch in potato. Acta Scientiarum Polonorum. Agricultura 17(3):153-169. Schilling G, Eißner H, Schmidt L, Peiter E (2016). Yield formation of five crop species under water shortage and differential potassium supply. Journal Plant Nutrition and Soil Science 179:234-243. https://doi.org/10.1002/jpln.201500407  Schulz E, Tohge T,  Zuther E, Fernie AR,   Hincha DK (2016). Flavonoids are determinants of freezing tolerance and cold acclimation in Arabidopsis thaliana. Scientific Reports 6(1):34027. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep34027  Shanina EP, Klyukina EM, Stafeeva MA, Belyaeva NV (2021). Potential of potatoes as a source of nutritional value: Amino acid composition of protein in stubbies of potatoes of the Ural region, Russia. Research on Crops 22:108-112. http://dx.doi.org/10.31830/2348-7542.2021.026  Shen M, Weihao W, Cao L (2020). Soluble dietary fibers from black soybean hulls: Physical and enzymatic modification, structure, physical properties, and cholesterol binding capacity. Journal of Food Science 85(6):1668-1674. https://doi.org/10.1111/1750-3841.15133  Silveyra MX, Lanteri ML, Damiano RB, Andreu AB (2018). Bactericidal and cytotoxic activities of polyphenol extracts from Solanum tuberosum spp. tuberosum and spp. andigena cultivars on Escherichia coli and human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells in vitro. Journal of Nutrition and Metabolism 2018:8073679. https://doi.org/10.1155/2018/8073679   Singh A, Raigond P, Lal MK, Singh B, Thakur N, Changan SS, … Dutt S. (2020). Effect of cooking methods on glycemic index and in vitro bioaccessibility of potato (Solanum tuberosum L.) carbohydrates. LWT 127:109363. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lwt.2020.109363  Singh N, Kamath V, Rajini PS (2005). Attenuation of hyperglycemia and associated biochemical parameters in STZ-induced diabetic rats by dietary supplementation of potato peel powder. Clinica Chimica Acta 353:165-175. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cccn.2004.10.016  Sun H, Lv C, Yang L, Wang Y, Zhang Q, Yu S, ... Zhou M (2014). Solanine induces mitochondria-mediated apoptosis in human pancreatic cancer cells. BioMed Research International 2014:805926. https://doi.org/10.1155/2014/805926  Imran S et al. (2025). Not Bot Horti Agrobo 53(1):14080  29       Sun Y, Byon CH, Yang Y, Bradley WE, Dell’Italia LJ, Sanders PW, Agarwal A, Wu H, Chen Y (2017). Dietary potassium regulates vascular calcification and arterial stiffness. JCI Insight 2(19):e94920. https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.94920  Tian J, Chen J, Ye X, Chen S (2016). Health benefits of the potato affected by domestic cooking: A review. Food Chemistry 202: 165-175. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2016.01.120  Tsao R (2009). Phytochemical profiles of potato and their roles in human health and wellness. Food. Special Issue 3:125-135. Ulmius M,  Önning G, Nilsson L (2012). Solution behavior of barley β-glucan as studied with asymmetrical flow field-flow fractionation. Food Hydrocolloids 26(1): 175-180. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodhyd.2011.05.004  Umadevi M, Kumar PS,  Bhowmik D,  Duraivel S (2013). Health benefits and cons of Solanum tuberosum. Journal of Medicinal Plants Studies 1(1):16-25. Usmani A, Mishra A (2016). The globe’s healthiest food with numerous medicinal properties—Solanum tuberosum. Research and Review. Journal of Pharmacology 6:1-10.  Valcarcel J, Reilly K, Gaffney M, O’Brien N (2015). Total carotenoids and l-ascorbic acid content in 60 varieties of potato (Solanum tuberosum L.) grown in Ireland. Potato Research 58:29-41. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11540-014-9270-4  ValcarceNavarre DA,  Brown CR,   Sathuvalli VR (2019). Potato vitamins, minerals and phytonutrients from a plant biology perspective. American Journal of Potato Research 96:111-126. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12230-018-09703-6  Van der Sman RGM, Broeze J (2013). Structuring of indirectly expanded snacks based on potato ingredients: A review. Journal of Food Engineering 114(4):413-425. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfoodeng.2012.09.001  Van Duyn MAS,  Pivonka E (2000). Overview of the health benefits of fruit and vegetable consumption for the dietetics professional: selected literature. Journal of the American Dietetic Association 100(12):1511-1521. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0002-8223(00)00420-x  Vanamala JK (2019). Potatoes for targeting colon cancer stem cells. American Journal of Potato Research 96(2):177-182. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12230-018-09700-9  Venn BJ, Green TJ (2007). Glycemic index and glycemic load: measurement issues and their effect on diet–disease relationships. European Journal of Clinical Nutrition 61(1):S122-S131. https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.ejcn.1602942  Vinson  JA,  Demkosky CA,  Navarre DA,  Smyda MA (2012). High-antioxidant potatoes: acute in vivo antioxidant source and hypotensive agent in humans after supplementation to hypertensive subjects. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 60(27):6749-6754. https://doi.org/10.1021/jf2045262  Visvanathan R, Jayathilake C, Chaminda Jayawardana B, Liyanage R (2016). Health‐beneficial properties of potato and compounds of interest. Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture 96(15):4850-4860. https://doi.org/10.1002/jsfa.7848  Wahyudi IA, Ramadhan FR, Wijaya RIK, Ardhani R, Utami TW (2020). Analgesic, anti-inflammatory and anti-biofilm-forming activity of Potato (Solanum tuberosum L.) peel extract. Indonesian Journal of Cancer Chemoprevention 11(1):30-35. Wang Q,  Chen Q, He M,  Mir P,  Su  J,  Yang Q (2011). Inhibitory effect of antioxidant extracts from various potatoes on the proliferation of human colon and liver cancer cells. Nutrition and Cancer 63(7):1044-1052. https://doi.org/10.1080/01635581.2011.597538  Wang Y, Li D, Lv Z, Feng B, Li T,... Weng X (2023). Efficacy and safety of Gutong Patch compared with NSAIDs for knee osteoarthritis: A real-world multicenter, prospective cohort study in China. Pharmacological Research 197:106954. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.phrs.2023.106954  Wasilewska A, Klekotka U, Zambrzycka M, Zambrowski G, Święcicka I, Kalska-Szostko B (2023). Physico-chemical properties and antimicrobial activity of silver nanoparticles fabricated by green synthesis. Food Chemistry 400:133960. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2022.133960  Wijesinha-Bettoni R,   Mouillé B (2019). The contribution of potatoes to global food security, nutrition and healthy diets. American Journal of Potato Research 96:139-149. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12230-018-09697-1  Wiśniewska P, Śliwińska M, Dymerski T, Wardencki W, Namieśnik J (2015). The analysis of vodka: a review paper. Food Analytical Methods 8:2000-2010. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12161-015-0089-7  Imran S et al. (2025). Not Bot Horti Agrobo 53(1):14080  30       Wu  J, Cho E, Willett WC, Sastry SM,  Schaumberg DA (2015). Intakes of lutein, zeaxanthin, and other carotenoids and age-related macular degeneration during 2 decades of prospective follow-up. JAMA Ophthalmology 133(12):1415-1424. https://doi.org/10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2015.3590  Xing L, Zhang H, Qi R,  Tsao R,  Mine Y (2019). Recent advances in the understanding of the health benefits and molecular mechanisms associated with green tea polyphenols. Journal of Agriculture Food Chemistry 67:1029-1043. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jafc.8b06146  Yang X, Wang J, Xia X, Zhang Z, He J, Nong B, ... Deng G (2021). OsTTG1, a WD40 repeat gene, regulates anthocyanin biosynthesis in rice. The Plant Journal 107(1):198-214. https://doi.org/10.1111/tpj.15285 Zeng G, Wu Z, Cao W, Wang Y, Deng X, ... Zhou Y (2020). Identification of anti-nociceptive constituents from the pollen of Typha angustifolia L. using effect-directed fractionation. Natural Product Research 34(7):1041-1045. https://doi.org/10.1080/14786419.2018.1539979 Zhang H, Hassan YI,  Renaud J, Liu R,  Yang C,  Sun Y,  Tsao R (2017). Bioaccessibility, bioavailability, and anti‐inflammatory effects of anthocyanins from purple root vegetables using mono‐and co‐culture cell models. Molecular Nutrition & Food Research 61(10): 1600928. https://doi.org/10.1002/mnfr.201600928  Zhang H, Li Y, Cao C, Na R, Han Y (2023). Enzymatic modification of potato residue fiber improves cholesterol and sugar absorption. American Journal of Potato Research 100:305-313. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12230-023-09918-2  Zhang H, Zuo X, Sun B, Wei B, Fu J, … Xiao X (2023). Fuzzy-PID-based atmosphere packaging gas distribution system for fresh food. Applied Sciences 13(4): 2674. https://doi.org/10.3390/app13042674  Zhang R, Wang M, Zhu T, Wan Z, Chen X, ... Xiao X (2024). Wireless charging flexible in-situ optical sensing for food monitoring. Chemical Engineering Journal 488:150808. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2024.150808 Zhang X, Zeng Y, Liu J, Men Y, Sun Y (2023). Effects of three extraction methods on the structural and functional properties of insoluble dietary fibers from mycoprotein. Food Chemistry Advances 2:100299. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.focha.2023.100299  Zhang Z, Venn BJ, Monro J, Mishra S (2018). Subjective satiety following meals incorporating rice, pasta and potato. Nutrients 10(11):1739. https://doi.org/10.3390/nu10111739  Zhao D,  Simon JE,  Wu Q (2020). A critical review on grape polyphenols for neuroprotection: Strategies to enhance bio efficacy. Critical Review Food Science and Nutrition 60:597-625. https://doi.org/10.1080/10408398.2018.1546668      The journal offers free, immediate, and unrestricted access to peer-reviewed research and scholarly work. Users are allowed to read, download, copy, distribute, print, search, or link to the full texts of the articles, or use them for any other lawful purpose, without asking prior permission from the publisher or the author.  License - Articles published in Notulae Botanicae Horti Agrobotanici Cluj-Napoca are Open-Access, distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY 4.0) License. © Articles by the authors; Licensee UASVM and SHST, Cluj-Napoca, Romania. The journal allows the author(s) to hold the copyright/to retain publishing rights without restriction.  Notes:  Material disclaimer: The authors are fully responsible for their work and they hold sole responsibility for the articles published in the journal.   Maps and affiliations: The publisher stay neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.  Responsibilities: The editors, editorial board and publisher do not assume any responsibility for the article’s contents and for the authors’ views expressed in their contributions. The statements and opinions published represent the views of the authors or persons to whom they are credited. Publication of research information does not constitute a recommendation or endorsement of products involved.   