 
 
    ISSN - 0975-7058 
Vol 11, Special Issue 6, 2019 
Original Article 
ANTIOXIDATIVE ACTIVITY AND PHYTOCHEMISTRY PROFILE OF HIBISCUS SABDARIFFA 
HERB EXTRACTS 
 
QOTRUNNADA FITROTUNNISA1, ADE ARSIANTI2,3*, NADZILA ANINDYA TEJAPUTRI1, FONA QORINA1 
1Medical Student, Faculty of Medicine, Universitas Indonesia, 2Department of Medical Chemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Universitas 
Indonesia, 3
Received: 11 Dec 2018, Revised and Accepted: 10 Mar 2019 
Drug Development Research Cluster, Indonesia Medical Education and Research Institute (IMERI), Faculty of Medicine, 
Universitas Indonesia 
Email: arsi_ade2002@yahoo.com 
ABSTRACT 
Objective: Hibiscus sabdariffa, known as Roselle, is a widely-cultivated herb in Indonesia and has been consumed as an herbal drink due to its 
medicinal properties. The purpose of this research is to identify the antioxidant activity and phytochemical profile of Hibiscus sabdariffa. 
Methods: The Hibiscus sabdariffa samples were extracted and macerated with three different organic solvents: ethyl acetate, ethanol, and n-hexane. 
These extracts were then analyzed using thin layer chromatography (TLC) and phytochemical tests to identify the extracts’ secondary metabolites. 
The extracts’ antioxidant activity was evaluated using the 2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH) method.  
Results: The phytochemistry tests were positive for glycosides, alkaloids, steroids, triterpenoids, tannins, and flavonoids. The TLC analysis revealed 
that the extracts containing two to three organic compounds. The ethanol Hibiscus sabdariffa extracts with an IC50 value 103.63 ppm showed 
stronger antioxidant activity than the ethyl acetate extract.  
Conclusion: Ethanol Hibiscus sabdariffa extracts may be a potential source of natural antioxidant. 
Keywords: Antioxidant, DPPH, Hibiscus sabdariffa; IC50, Phytochemical 
© 2019 The Authors. Published by Innovare Academic Sciences Pvt Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons. 
org/licenses/by/4. 0/) DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.22159/ijap.2019.v11s6.33532 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Antioxidants protect the human body against free radicals, 
especially reactive oxygen species (ROS) [1]. ROS, which are 
products of the metabolism process, can be found in all living cells, 
such as the respiratory chain in the mitochondria. UV lights, 
pollutants, radiation, xenobiotic, and bugs are the most common 
sources of extracellular ROS [1]. Several typesof ROS exist, including 
hydrogen peroxide, superoxide anion radicals, reactive hydroxyl 
radicals, singlet oxygen, hypochlorite radicals, nitric oxide radicals, 
and lipid oxide radicals [1, 2]. ROS are not harmful in controlled 
amounts, but if the production of ROS exceeds endogenous 
antioxidants which produces within the body, oxidative stress will 
occur and may lead to DNA mutation and protein denaturation and 
affect carbohydrate and lipid metabolism [1]. Oxidative stress is also 
associated with the etiology of many diseases, such as cancer, arthritis, 
cardiovascular disease, and diabetes [1]. Therefore, maintaining a 
balance between antioxidant levels and ROS is vital [3]. Antioxidants 
may interfere with ROS in many ways, such as scavenging free radicals, 
protecting cells from lipid peroxidation-induced damage, inhibiting 
malondialdehyde formation, protecting the cell from fft-BHP-induced 
damage, inhibiting thiobarbituric acid formation, and reducing 
glutathione depletion [4]. The flavonoid action mechanism interferes 
with ROS and quenches free radicals by chelating metals, stimulating 
antioxidant enzymes, and releasing a hydrogen atom that suppresses 
the enzymes that lead to free radical formation [1]. 
There are two classes of antioxidants, natural and synthetic 
antioxidants. Natural antioxidants are preferred because synthetic 
antioxidants produce substances that have a carcinogenic effects [5]. 
Moreover, natural antioxidants can be easily found in all plant parts 
[4]. Therefore, research concerning natural antioxidants from plants 
has intensified. For example, Hibiscus sabdariffa, commonly known as 
Roselle and part of Malvaceae family, and is widely cultivated in 
tropical and subtropical countries (i.e., Indonesia) [4]. Roselle calyces 
are consumed in herbal drinks, jam, pudding, teas, gelatin, and cake 
[4]. Roselle has been consumed as an herbal drink due to its medicinal 
properties; it has anti-inflammatory, antibacterial, antipyretic, 
antifungal, antinociceptive, antiparasitic, hepatoprotective, 
nephroprotective, and diuretic effects due to its potent antioxidants, 
including anthocyanins, flavonoids, organic acids, and polysaccharides 
[4]. The amount of antioxidants in Hibiscus sabdariffa plants varies 
based on environment, ecology, variety, genetics, and harvest 
conditions [4]. The Hibiscus sabdariffa antioxidants may be used as 
anticancer therapies due to their cytotoxicity [4]. For example, the 
protocatechuic acid, polyphenol, and anthocyanin in Roselle extracts 
has an apoptotic effect on cancer cell lines, reduces carcinogenic 
action, and inhibits tumour metastasis in tissue [4]. 
Therefore, the purpose of this research is to evaluate the 
phytochemical profile and antioxidant activity of Hibiscus sabdariffa 
extracts. The Hibiscus sabdariffa sample was extracted and macerated 
in three different solvents: ethyl acetate, ethanol, and n-hexane. Then, 
the antioxidant activity was evaluated using the DPPH method. Finally, 
the extract was analyzed using a phytochemistry test and thin layer 
chromatography to identify its organic compounds.  
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
Extraction of Hibiscus sabdariffa samples  
The Hibiscus sabdariffa flowers were purchased in a local market, 
the AEON Mall, in Serpong. The flowers were dried, ground, and 
immersed in a container with three different solvents: ethyl acetate, 
ethanol, and n-hexane. The maceration process was done in stages. 
First, the flowers were macerated into 500 ml of the first solvent (n-
hexane) for 24 h. Then, they were filtered and the solid filtrate was 
macertated into 500 ml of the second solvent (ethyl acetate). After 
filtration, the solid filtrate was macerated into 500 ml of the third 
solvent (ethanol). Subsequently, liquid filtrate of n-hexane, ethyl 
acetate and ethanol respectively, were concentrated using a vacuum-
drying process in a rotary evaporator for 12–48 h. 
Antioxidant analysis 
The DPPH (2.2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl) method was used to 
determine the Hibiscus sabdariffa extract’s antioxidant activity. The 
ethanol extracts in five different concentration (3.75; 6.25; 12.5; 25; 
50) and 100 µL ethyl acetate were placed into a microcentrifuge 
tube. Then, 2.9 ml of the DPPH molecule at a 0.004% concentration 
in 0.75% methanol were added to the sample tube, positive control 
Arsianti et al. 
Int J App Pharm, Vol 11, Special Issue 6, 2019, 29-32 
 
30 
tube, and blank tube. All the tubes were incubated in the dark at 
room temperature for 60 min. The absorbance was read using 517 
nm wave spectrophotometry. The percentage of DPPH inhibition 
was calculated using the following formula:  
Percentage of DPPH inhibition 
=
(The absorbance of blank −  the absorbance of a sample)
The absorbance of blank
 x 100% 
Where the absorbance of the blank refers to the absorbance of the 
DPPH without the added sample and the absorbance of the sample 
refers to the absorbance of the DPPH with the added sample. 
Thin layer chromatography  
Thin layer chromatography (TLC) was used to determine the 
number of organic compounds in the extract. This method separated 
the organic compound in the sample based on polarity. A thin plate 
was coated with an inert material, such as silica gel is used as a 
stationary phase. The mobile phase is a mixture of chloroform 
(CHCl3) and methanol (CH3OH) in ratio 4:1, which was placed inside 
the chamber. Sample were prepared by diluted the extracts 0.5 ml of 
methanol. The sample was applied to the TLC plate by using a 
capillary pipette. It was then dried and placed on the mobile phase in 
chamber. Chemical compounds containing in the sample migrated 
and eluted at different rates based on its polarity. After completion, 
spots of chemical compound in the TLC plate was visualized by UV 
lamp at the wavelength of 254 nm. The compound was identified 
based on the retention factor (Rf) of its spot. The retention factor is a 
parameter for interpretation of the migrated sample, which 
represent the position of the spot in the stationary phase after 
elution. The Rf formula is as follows:  
Rf =
Distance moved by sample
Distance moved by solvent
 
Phytochemical test 
Phytochemical tests were used to determine secondary metabolites, 
such as glycoside, alkaloid, steroid, triterpenoid, saponin, tannin, and 
flavonoid, containing in the Hibiscus sabdariffa extracts. The test 
procedures for each metabolite are the following:  
Glycoside test 
The glycosides test was conducted by evaporating 0.1 ml of the 
Hibiscus sabdariffa ethanol, ethyl acetate, and n-Hexane extracts 
separately, over a water bath. The remaining solution was diluted in 
5 ml of acetic acid anhydrate. Then, 10 drops of concentrated 
sulfuric acid were added. The formation of a blue or green product 
indicated a positive result for glycosides. 
Alkaloid test 
The alkaloid test was conducted by evaporating the solution in a 
porcelain cup. The residue was diluted in 5 ml of 2 N HCl. Then, it 
was divided it into three tubes. The first tube was the blank, and it 
was mixed with 2 N HCl. Three drops of a Dragendorff reagent were 
added to the second tube. Then, three drops of a Mayer reagent were 
added to the third tube. The formation of a yellow precipitate in the 
third tube and orange precipitate in the second tube indicated that 
the solution was positive for alkaloids. 
Steroid and triterpenoid test 
The Liebermann-Burchard reaction was used in the steroid and 
triterpenoid test. This test was conducted by evaporating 2 ml of the 
solution in a porcelain cup. The residue was then diluted in 0.5 ml of 
chloroform (CHCl3) and 0.5 ml of anhydrate acetic acid. Then, 2 ml of 
concentrated sulfuric acid was added through the tube wall. The 
presence of steroids was indicated by the formation of a blue-green 
ring, whereas the presence of triterpenoids was indicated by the 
formation of a violet or brownish ring.  
Saponin test 
The saponin test was conducted by adding 10 ml of the solution to a 
tube. The tube was then shaken vertically for approximately 10 
seconds. For the next 10 seconds, the tube was kept in a standing 
position. If the solution was positive for saponin, the presence of 
stable foam formation around 1–10 cm in height was visible for less 
than 10 min. The addition of 1 drop of 2 N HCl was used in the 
confirmation test as it showed that the foam still existed. 
Tannin test 
The tannin test was conducted by dissolving 1 ml of the Hibiscus 
sabdariffa extracts in a solution of 10% (b/v) of FeCl3. A greenish-
black or dark blue color indicated the presence of tannin. 
Flavonoid test 
Flavonoid screening was conducted by evaporating 1 ml of the 
solution in a porcelain cup until it was dry. The remaining solution was 
moistened with acetone and mixed with smooth oxalic acid and boric 
acid powder. The porcelain cup was heated at boiling temperature (80 
°-100 °C) in a water bath. Then, the residue was mixed with 10 ml of 
ether. The porcelain cup was read under a 365 nm UV light. The 
presence of a yellow fluorescence indicated a positive result. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Antioxidant activity OF Hibiscus sabdariffa 
The DPPH (2.2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl) method was used to 
analyze the antioxidant activity of the Hibiscus sabdariffa extracts. 
This method has been widely used to evaluate antioxidant activity 
due to its simplicity, low cost, and efficiency [6]. 
The DPPH method uses the half maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50) 
value as a parameter for interpretation of antioxidant activity. IC50 
represents the concentration of substrate (extract) that reduces the 
DPPH activity by 50% [6]. IC50 value is inversely proportional to the 
antioxidant activity, so the lower IC50 value of the substrate or extract, 
the higher its antioxidant activity [6]. The results of antioxidant activity 
evaluation of Hibiscus sabdariffa extracts are summarized in table 1. 
The presence of 
antioxidants may reduce the DPPH by binding a hydrogen atom from 
the antioxidant and a nitrogen atom from the DPPH [4]. The effect of 
the antioxidant is evident when the original violet color of the DPPH 
changes to yellow [6]. The absorption of the DPPH is monitored 
using a 517 nm UV light [6]. In this work, non-polar n-hexane extract 
of Hibiscus sabdariffa was not evaluated its antioxidant activity by 
DPPH because it cannot dissolved well in DPPH reagent, therefore 
polar and semipolar extracts such as ethanol and ethylcetate extract 
are more suitable to be analyzed by DPPH method [7]. 
 
Table 1: Antioxidant activity of the Hibiscus sabdariffa ethanol extract 
Concentration (ppm) % Inhibition Standard deviation 
3.75 2.8 0.0326 
6.25 3.7 0.0173 
12.5 7.9 0.0011 
25 15.1 0.0142 
50 24.1 0.0085 
 
The linear equation that represented the relationship between the 
IC50 value and the concentration of the Hibiscus sabdariffa ethanol 
extract is y = 0.4668x+1.6261 and R2= 0.984. Fig. 1 illustrates the 
relationship between the percentage of DPPH activity inhibition and 
the concentration of the Hibiscus sabdariffa ethanol extract. The x-
axis in the graph represents the concentration of the ethanol extract 
required to reduce the DPPH activity by 50%, while the y-axis 
represents the IC50 value. 
Arsianti et al. 
Int J App Pharm, Vol 11, Special Issue 6, 2019, 29-32 
 
31 
 
Fig. 1: The relationship between the percentage of inhibition 
and concentration of the Hibiscus sabdariffa ethanol extracts 
Based on the results, none of the concentrations that were analyzed 
achieved a 50% inhibition of the DPPH activity. However, the IC50 
value of the ethanol extract can be calculated using the linear 
equation y = 0.4668x+1.6261, where the y-axis represents the 
percentage of DPPH activity inhibition and the x-axis represents the 
concentration of the ethanol extract. Therefore, the IC50 value 
required to inhibit 50% of the DPPH activity in the ethanol extract 
was 103.63, which suggests moderate antioxidant activity. The 
percentage of inhibition in the highest extract concentration, 
50µg/ml, was 24.1%.  
The ethyl acetate extract test results are summarized in table 2. 
  
Table 2: The antioxidant activity of Hibiscus sabdariffa ethyl acetate extract 
Concentrations (ppm) % Inhibition Standard deviation 
3.75 1.1 0.0109 
6.25 3.6 0.0106 
12.5 3.7 0.0065 
25 7.5 0.0457 
50 11.8 0.0018 
 
The linear equation that represents the relationship between the 
IC50 value and the concentration of the Hibiscus sabdariffa ethyl 
acetate extract is y = 0.2163x+1.3277, where R2
 
= 0.9594. The x-axis 
represents the concentration of the ethyl acetate extract required to 
inhibit 50% of the DPPH activity, while the y-axis represents the IC50 
value. Fig. 2 illustrates the relationship between the percentage of 
DPPH activity inhibition and the Hibiscus sabdariffa ethyl acetate 
extract concentration. 
The IC50 value of the ethyl acetate extract can be calculated using the 
linear equation y = 0.2163x+1.3277, where the y-axis represents the 
percentage of DPPH activity inhibition and the x-axis represents the 
concentration of the ethyl acetate extract. Therefore, the IC50 value of 
ethyl acetate extract that is required to inhibit 50% of the DPPH 
activity is 225.02, which indicates that ethyl acetate extract of Hibiscus 
sabdariffa has a weak antioxidant activity. The percentage of inhibition 
at the highest extract concentration (50µg/ml) was 11.8%. 
Fig. 2: The relationship between the percentage of inhibition 
and the Hibiscus sabdariffa ethyl acetate extract concentration 
 
Table 3: A comparison of the IC50 values of the Hibiscus sabdariffa ethyl acetate and ethanol extracts 
Extract IC50 value (ppm) 
Ethyl acetate 225.02 
Ethanol 103.63 
 
The IC50 values are separated into four levels: very strong, strong, 
moderate, and weak. An IC50 value below 50 ppm indicates very strong 
antioxidant activity, an IC50 value of 50–100 ppm indicates strong 
antioxidant activity, an IC50 value of 101–150 ppm indicates moderate 
antioxidant activity, and an IC50 value above 150 ppm indicates weak 
antioxidant activity.[8]Therefore, the Hibiscus sabdariffa ethanol 
extract had stronger antioxidant activity than the ethyl acetate extract 
as the ethanol extract had moderate antioxidant activity, while the 
ethyl acetate extract had weak antioxidant activity.  
The results from the current study are different from previous 
research, in which the etanol extract of Hibiscus sabdariffa had a low 
IC50 value of 46,13±3,37 ppm, indicated a strong antioxidant activity 
[9]. The differences may be the result of many factors, including the 
different varieties of the flowers, genetics, the environment of the 
plant; the choice of solvent; and the solubility of the product [1]. 
Ethyl acetate is typically used to extract terpenoids, flavonoids, and 
alkaloids, while ethanol is typically used to extract polyphenols, 
saponins, flavanols, and alkaloids [10]. 
Thin layer chromatography  
The retention factor (Rf) value and TLC results of the Hibiscus 
sabdariffa extracts are displayed in table 4 and fig. 3, respectively. 
  
Table 4: The retention factor (Rf) of n-hexane, ethanol of the Hibiscus sabdariffa 
Extract Rf value 
1 2 3 4 5 
n-Hexane 0.143 0.571 0.742 0.914 - 
Ethanol 0.114 0.571 0.742 0.857 0.942 
Ethyl Acetate 0.228 0.543 0.721 0.886 - 
 
Arsianti et al. 
Int J App Pharm, Vol 11, Special Issue 6, 2019, 29-32 
 
32 
 
Fig. 3(a): The TLC results of the Hibiscus sabdariffa n-Hexane, 
ethanol, and ethyl acetate extract 
The TLC analysis was used to qualitatively identify the number 
of organic compounds in the Hibiscus sabdariffa extracts. The 
analysis revealed that n-hexane and ethyl acetate extracts 
contain four spots of chemical compounds, while the ethanol 
extract contains five spots of chemical compounds. The n-hexane 
and ethanol extracts had two similar spots with the same Rf 
values, 0.571 and 0.742. However, further study can be 
conducted to evaluate the specific organic compounds. For 
example, to evaluate the presence of flavonoids, ammonia may 
be sprayed on the plate, and the test results may be read under a 
366 nm UV light. A blue colored notch at Rf 0.54 and 0.92 
indicates a positive result [11]. 
PHYTOCHEMICAL PROFILE 
The phytochemical profile of Hibiscus sabdariffa is summarized in 
table 5. 
 
Table 5: The phytochemical composition of Hibiscus sabdariffa 
Metabolites Solvent 
Ethanol Ethyl Acetate N-Hexane 
Glycoside - + + 
Alkaloid - + + 
Steroid - + + 
Triterpenoid + - - 
Saponin - - - 
Tannin + + - 
Flavonoid + + + 
 
The phytochemistry test for the Hibiscus sabdariffa extracts showed 
that the sample was positive for glycosides, alkaloids, steroid, 
triterpenoid, tannin, and flavonoids. Only the ethyl acetate and n-
Hexane extracts were positive for glycosides, alkaloids, and steroids. 
Triterpenoid is only present in the ethanol extracts, whereas tannin 
is present in the ethanol and ethyl acetate extracts. Flavonoids are 
present in all the extracts. The results agree with several previous 
studies that found that Hibiscus sabdariffa mostly contains 
flavonoids, anthocyanins, and polyphenolic acids [12].  
Flavonoids are compounds extracted from the plant that form the aroma 
and color of the flowers; they can be found in several parts of a plant 
[13]. The subclasses of the flavonoids contained in the Hibiscus sabdariffa 
are as follows: quercetin, hibiscitrin, chlorogenic acid, luteolin, 
gossypitrin, protocatechuic acid, gossytrin, eugenol, pelargonic acid, and 
sterols [1]. Flavonoids have many benefits in human health due to 
several mechanisms, including scavenging free radicals. Flavonoids react 
with and stabilize radical compounds, making them less radical, through 
direct and indirect pathways. For example, rutin and epicatechin have 
inhibitory properties that affect the XO enzyme [12, 13]. This study is 
limited to the qualitative measurement of secondary metabolites.  
CONCLUSION  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT  
The Hibiscus sabdariffa ethanol extracts showed potent antioxidant 
activity and had many organic compounds. Therefore, Hibiscus 
sabdariffa may be used as a natural antioxidant and developed as a 
therapeutic alternative for cancer and inflammatory disease. Further 
study should evaluate the specific amount and type of antioxidants 
and their therapeutic applications. 
This article was presented at The 3rd International Conference and 
Exhibition on Indonesian Medical Education and Research Institute 
(ICE on IMERI 2018), Faculty of Medicine, Universitas Indonesia, 
Jakarta, Indonesia. We express our gratitude to Directorate of 
Research and Public Service (DRPM), University of Indonesia for the 
Publikasi Internasional Terindeks Scopus Untuk Tugas Akhir 
Mahasiswa (PITTA) research grant, fiscal year 2018. We thank the 
3rd ICE on IMERI Committee who had supported the peer review and 
manuscript preparation before submitting to the journal. 
AUTHORS CONTRIBUTIONS 
All the authors have contributed equally 
CONFLICT OF INTERESTS 
The authors declare no conflict of interest in this study 
REFERENCES 
1. Banjarnahor SDS, Artanti N. Antioxidant propert1ies of 
flavonoids. Med J Indones 2014;23:239–40.  
2. Kumar S. The importance of antioxidant and their role in 
pharmaceutical science-a review. Asian J Res Chem Pharm Sci 
2014;1:30. 
3. Shebis Y, Iluz D, Kinel Tahan Y, Dubinsky Z, Yehoshua Y. Natural 
antioxidants: function and sources. Food Nutr Sci 2013;4:643.  
4. Da-Costa-Rocha I, Bonnlaender B, Sievers H, Pischel I, Heinrich 
M. A phytochemical and pharmacological review. Food Chem 
2014;165:427–34.  
5. Butnario M, Grozea I. Antioxidant (antiradical compounds). 
J Bioequivalence Bioavailability 2012;4:1-3. 
6. Kedare SB, Singh RP. Genesis and development of DPPH method 
of antioxidant assay. J Food Sci Technol 2001;48:412–22. 
7. Barchan A, Bakkali M, Arakrak A, Pagan R, Laglaoui A. The 
effects of solvents polarity on the phenolic contents and 
antioxidant activity of three mentha species extracts. Int J Curr 
Microbiol Appl Sci 2014;3:399–412. 
8. Muawanah, Ahmad A, Natsir H. Antioxidant activity and toxicity 
polysaccharide extract from red algae eucheuma cottonii and 
eucehuma spinosum. Marina Chim Acta 2016;17:20. 
9. Kumar M, Garg R, Garg R. Phytochemical properties and 
antioxidant activity of hibiscus sabdariffa linn. Int J Pharm 
Chem Sci 2012;1:1236-40. 
10. Jadid N, Hidayati D, Hartanti SR, Arraniry BA, Rachman RY, 
Wikanta W. Antioxidant activities of different solvent extracts 
of Piper retrofractum Vahl. using DPPH assay. AIP Conf Proc 
2017;1854:020019. 
11. Marliana SD, Suryanti V, Suyono. Skrining fitokimia dan analisis 
kromatografi lapis tipis komponen kimia buah labu siam 
(sechiumedulejacq. swartz.) dalam ekstrak etanol. Biofarmasi 
2005;3:30–31.  
12. Formagio ASN, Ramos DD, Ramalho SR, Silva MM, Zarate NAH, 
Foglio MA, et al. Phenolic compounds of hibiscus sabdariffa and 
influence of organic residues on its antioxidant and antitumoral 
properties. Braz J Biol 2015;75:70. 
13. Panche AN, Diwan AD, Chandra SR. Flavonoids: an overview. J 
Nutr Sci 2016;5:8. 
 
