Citation: Ansari, P.; Samia, J.F.; Khan,J.T.; Rafi, M.R.; Rahman, M.S.;Rahman, A.B.; Abdel-Wahab, Y.H.A.;Seidel, V. Protective Effects ofMedicinal Plant-Based Foods againstDiabetes: A Review onPharmacology, Phytochemistry, andMolecular Mechanisms. Nutrients2023, 15, 3266. https://doi.org/10.3390/nu15143266Academic Editor: Jose LaraReceived: 22 June 2023Revised: 15 July 2023Accepted: 19 July 2023Published: 24 July 2023Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.This article is an open access articledistributed under the terms andconditions of the Creative CommonsAttribution (CC BY) license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).nutrientsReviewProtective Effects of Medicinal Plant-Based Foods againstDiabetes: A Review on Pharmacology, Phytochemistry, andMolecular MechanismsPrawej Ansari 1,2,* , Jannatul F. Samia 1, Joyeeta T. Khan 1 , Musfiqur R. Rafi 1, Md. Sifat Rahman 1,Akib B. Rahman 1, Yasser H. A. Abdel-Wahab 2 and Veronique Seidel 31 Department of Pharmacy, School of Pharmacy and Public Health, Independent University, Bangladesh (IUB),Dhaka 1229, Bangladesh2 School of Biomedical Sciences, Ulster University, Coleraine BT52 1SA, UK; y.abdel-wahab@ulster.ac.uk3 Natural Products Research Laboratory, Strathclyde Institute of Pharmacy and Biomedical Sciences,University of Strathclyde, Glasgow G4 0RE, UK; veronique.seidel@strath.ac.uk* Correspondence: chemist89ansari@gmail.comAbstract: Diabetes mellitus (DM) comprises a range of metabolic disorders characterized by highblood glucose levels caused by defects in insulin release, insulin action, or both. DM is a widespreadcondition that affects a substantial portion of the global population, causing high morbidity andmortality rates. The prevalence of this major public health crisis is predicted to increase in theforthcoming years. Although several drugs are available to manage DM, these are associated withadverse side effects, which limits their use. In underdeveloped countries, where such drugs are oftencostly and not widely available, many people continue to rely on alternative traditional medicine,including medicinal plants. The latter serves as a source of primary healthcare and plant-basedfoods in many low- and middle-income countries. Interestingly, many of the phytochemicals theycontain have been demonstrated to possess antidiabetic activity such as lowering blood glucoselevels, stimulating insulin secretion, and alleviating diabetic complications. Therefore, such plantsmay provide protective effects that could be used in the management of DM. The purpose of thisarticle was to review the medicinal plant-based foods traditionally used for the management ofDM, including their therapeutic effects, pharmacologically active phytoconstituents, and antidiabeticmode of action at the molecular level. It also presents future avenues for research in this field.Keywords: medicinal plant-based foods; pharmacology; diabetes; insulin; phytoconstituents1. IntroductionDiabetes mellitus (DM) is a severe medical condition that affects how the body pro-cesses glucose in the blood. It can develop following either a deficiency in the production ofthe anabolic hormone insulin or a lack of insulin sensitivity from cells or both. The resultingexcess sugar in the blood leads to abnormalities in the metabolism of carbohydrates, lipids,and proteins. Insufficient production of insulin can also lead to these disruptions [1,2].Diabetes is a widespread condition that affects a substantial portion of the global popu-lation, causing high morbidity and mortality rates and resulting in a major public healthcrisis. In 2021, it was estimated that over half a billion people have diabetes. This numberis predicted to continue to rise, with 783.2 million people expected to live with diabetes by2045 [3]. Diabetes is considered one of the five most severe diseases worldwide. The mainsymptoms of diabetes include increased blood glucose, excessive thirst, frequent urination,impaired vision, hyperphagia, weight loss, nausea, and vomiting [2,4].Type 1 and Type 2 are the two most widespread forms of diabetes. Type 2 diabetesmellitus (T2DM) accounts for the majority of diabetes cases (approximately 90–95% ofcases). Among type 1 diabetes patients, about 85% are reported with islet cell antibodies,Nutrients 2023, 15, 3266. https://doi.org/10.3390/nu15143266 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/nutrientsNutrients 2023, 15, 3266 2 of 41which act against cells from the islets of Langerhans, affecting glutamic acid decarboxylase(GAD) function [2]. Type 1 diabetes (T1DM) is generally associated with insulin insuf-ficiency due to the autoimmune destruction of pancreatic β-cells by CD4+ and CD8+ Tcells and macrophages. The abnormal functioning of pancreatic α-cells also contributesto the worsening of insulin insufficiency. The α-cells produce an excessive amount ofglucagon, which further leads to metabolic disorders. The decreased insulin and glucosemetabolism in peripheral tissues contributes to raising the level of free fatty acids in theblood by triggering lipolysis. As a result, the target tissues fail to exhibit normal insulinresponsiveness due to a deficiency in the glucokinase enzyme in the liver and glucosetransporter (GLUT)-4 protein in adipose tissues [2]. On the other hand, the progression ofT2DM is usually genetic and associated with obesity triggering a low capacity of β-cells tosecrete insulin and insulin resistance [4]. In T2DM, chronic hyperglycemia is frequentlyobserved in blood vessels of the cardiac, renal, and retinal circulation. The excess fatdeposition in the blood vessels, heart, or peripheral tissues exacerbates insulin resistanceand contributes to cardiovascular diseases [2]. Gestational diabetes is another type ofdiabetes that refers to glucose intolerance during pregnancy and heightened fetal–maternalcomplications [5]. Diabetes is interconnected to both micro and macrovascular complica-tions, including retinopathy, nephropathy, neuropathy, ischemic heart disease, peripheralvascular disease, and cerebrovascular disease. This results in organ and tissue damage inone-third to one-half of all diabetic patients. The precise etiology of this damage remainselusive, although growing evidence suggests that oxidative stress and the generation offree radicals play a significant role [6].Insulin therapy and several classes of antidiabetic drugs (i.e., biguanides, dipeptidylpeptidase-4 (DPP-4) inhibitors, meglitinides, sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 (SGLT2) in-hibitors, sulfonylureas, and thiazolidinediones (TZDs) are currently available to treatdiabetes and reduce the incidence of vascular complications [7–9]. However, many peoplein low- and middle-income countries find it difficult to obtain reasonably priced and widelyaccessible diabetes treatment options due to the unexpected rise in diabetes prevalenceand associated medical expenses [3]. Another more holistic approach to the treatmentof diabetes is the use of alternative medical systems such as Chinese Medicine, Unani,Ayurveda, and homeopathy [10]. Such traditional systems often use medicinal plants (e.g.,turmeric, cardamom, garlic, onion, ginger, tulsi, and cloves) and other natural remediesthat have become integral components of daily diets and are believed to possess antidia-betic properties [11]. Microorganisms have also presented a promising opportunity for thediscovery of antidiabetic drugs. One such example is acarbose, a pseudo-oligosaccharidederived from various actinomycetes [11]. Recent studies have found that venom-derivedcompounds from cone snails, sea anemones, bees, scorpions, snakes, and spiders alsopossess effective antidiabetic properties [12]. The World Health Organization (WHO) hasestimated that traditional medicine is used as a primary healthcare option by almost 80% ofthe global population. Over 800 plants have been reported to have antidiabetic properties,and these plants are often considered to have fewer side effects than synthetic drugs andcontain bioactive compounds or phytochemicals with various biological properties [13–15].The aim of this review is to discuss the medicinal plant-based foods traditionally used forthe management of diabetes, including their active phytochemical constituents, therapeuticeffects, molecular modes of action, and future prospects.2. MethodsAn extensive search was conducted using Google Scholar and PubMed databases towrite this comprehensive review article. The keywords that were used included “Patho-physiology of diabetes”, “Prevalence of diabetes”, “Diabetes types and mechanisms”,“Diabetes epidemiology”, “Diabetes risk factors and management”, “Diabetes and Plantactive components”, “Diabetes and plant dietary components”, “Antidiabetic properties ofmedicinal plants”, and others relevant to the topic. Over 400 articles were evaluated, andNutrients 2023, 15, 3266 3 of 41half of them were selected and incorporated into this article, ensuring only the most up todate, ranging from years 1998 to 2022, and relevant information was included.3. The Pathophysiology of DiabetesDiabetes mellitus is a dysregulation of glucose homeostasis either caused by theinability to produce insulin (in Type 1 diabetes) or an insufficient response to insulin (inType 2 diabetes). DM occurs when the delicate balance of insulin and glucagon secretion inthe pancreatic islets of Langerhans is disrupted due to alterations in the functioning of theinsulin-producing β cells and glucagon-producing α cells [16]. Diabetes usually developswhen fasting plasma glucose levels increase due to insulin resistance in the peripheraltissues (also known as the prediabetes stage). It further progresses to hyperinsulinemia,which is characterized by increased insulin production. The long-term overproduction ofinsulin causes cell failure, in turn contributing to hyperglycemia [17].The increase in blood glucose levels beyond the normal physiological range in indi-viduals with diabetes can lead to various complications, including renal, neural, ocular,and cardiovascular disorders, emphasizing the need for an early diagnosis of diabetes [17].Polyuria serves as a crucial diagnostic hallmark for the early detection of diabetes andas an underlying factor in the pathogenesis of DM [18]. Hyperglycemia has also beenshown to activate certain metabolic pathways, which contributes to the pathogenesis ofdiabetic complications [19]. Among these metabolic pathways, protein kinase C (PKC)activation plays a significant role in hyperglycemia-induced atherosclerosis. PKC activa-tion is implicated in a variety of cellular responses, including growth factor expression,signaling pathway activation, and oxidative stress amplification. Hyperglycemia generallystimulates metabolic processes and increases ROS (reactive oxygen species) generation byactivating the polyol and hexosamine pathways resulting in diabetes-induced atherosclero-sis. The upregulation of the receptor for advanced glycation end product (RAGE) genes,which regulates cholesterol efflux, monocyte recruitment, macrophage infiltration, andlipid content in diabetic patients, triggers diabetes-induced inflammation [17]. Studieshave shown that in diabetic mice, there is an increase in multiple PKC isoforms in thevasculatures of the renal glomeruli and retina. It has been observed that the activationof β- and δ-isoforms appears to be preferential. The activation of PKC in various tissues,including the retina, heart, and renal glomeruli, accompanied by the rise in blood glucoselevels, exacerbates diabetic complications [20]. An increase in the total diacylglycerol(DAG) content has also been observed in various diabetic vascular complications, includingin “insulin sensitive” tissues like the liver and skeletal muscles in diabetic animals andpatients [21]. As a result of their production from glucose-derived dicarbonyl precursors,advanced glycation end products (AGEs) frequently accumulate intracellularly. AGEsare key triggers for the activation of intracellular signaling pathways and the alterationin protein activity [22]. Glycation disrupts the normal function of proteins by modifyingtheir molecular shapes, affecting enzymatic activity, lowering breakdown capacity, andinterfering with receptor recognition. Upon AGE degradation, highly reactive AGE in-termediates (e.g., methylglyoxal, glyoxal) are formed. These reactive species are able toproduce additional AGEs at a faster rate than glucose itself, fueling the production of AGEsand contributing to the pathogenesis of DM [23]. The pathogenesis of DM also involves thegeneration of pro-inflammatory mediators and ROS with elevated levels of cyclo-oxygenase(COX)-2, a crucial regulator in the conversion of arachidonic acid into prostaglandins thatmediate inflammation, immunomodulation, apoptosis, and blood flow and elevated levelsof antioxidant enzymes (glutathione S-transferase (GST), superoxide dismutase (SOD), andcatalase (CAT)) counteracting the exacerbated oxidative stress [24].T1DM is an autoimmune disease primarily seen in children and adolescents. T1DMis associated with the selective destruction of β cells, with no damage to other islets cellssuch as α cells (that secrete glucagon), δ cells (that secrete somatostatin), and pancreaticpolypeptide cells (that modulate the rate of nutrient absorption). The development of T1DMis largely influenced by the rate of immune-mediated apoptosis of pancreatic β-cells. ANutrients 2023, 15, 3266 4 of 41strong connection has been established between damage to pancreatic β cells and genetics,as studies have revealed that variations in genes of the Human Leukocyte Antigen (HLA)complex increases T1DM susceptibility. In T1DM, mutations in such genes override self-tolerance mechanisms and result in the production of autoantibodies and T-cell cytotoxicto pancreatic β cells. This immune-mediated β-cell destruction and ultimate failure triggerdiabetic ketoacidosis (DKA), typically considered the initial symptom of the disease. Thepresence of autoantibodies is an identifying trait of T1DM. These include autoantibodiesto Glutamic Acid Decarboxylase (GADs) such as GAD65, autoantibodies to TyrosinePhosphatases IA-2 and IA-2α, autoantibodies to the Islet-Specific Zinc Transporter Isoform8 (ZnT8), Islet Cell Autoantibodies (ICAs) to β-cell cytoplasmic proteins like ICA512, andInsulin Autoantibodies (IAAs) [19,25].T2DM is a metabolic disorder characterized by increased glucose levels, ROS gen-eration, and inflammation, all of which are linked to obesity. The poor glycemic controlin T2DM provokes ROS generation resulting in the stimulation of the redox pathway.Antioxidant enzymes (e.g., SOD, CAT, and GST), as well as COX, are produced. In T2DM,the β Langerhans cells are hypersensitive to glucose in blood plasma. As a result, theyproduce higher than normal insulin levels. This hyperinsulinemia serves to counteracthyperglycemia, which impairs β cell functions. Chronic hyperglycemia further inducesmicrovascular complications resulting in higher morbidity and mortality [20]. Moreover,the accumulation of AGEs is a primary mediator in the progression of non-proliferativeretinopathy in T2DM. The pathophysiological cascades triggered by AGEs also play asignificant role in the development of diabetic complications. The accumulation of AGEsin the myocardium, observed in 50–60% of diabetic patients with microalbuminuria, hasbeen linked to diastolic dysfunction and highlights the complex interplay between AGEs,oxidative stress, and diabetic complications [21]. Fatty liver, characterized by fat deposi-tion in hepatocytes, is another key feature of T2DM. The high amounts of dietary lipidsand abundance of free fatty acids from adipose tissues to the liver, as well as lipogenesis,are the main reasons for this metabolic imbalance [16]. Insulin resistance predominatesin the liver and the muscles. The liver produces glucose from non-glucose substances(gluconeogenesis) in fasting periods to maintain a constant availability of carbohydrates.Increased gluconeogenesis is seen in hyperinsulinemia, suggesting that hepatic insulinresistance is an indicator of fasting hyperglycemia. The accumulation of fat in pancreaticislets ultimately contributes to β-cell dysfunction, leading to an increase in plasma glucoselevels and a reduction in insulin response to ingested glucose [19].Other types of diabetes include Maturity-Onset Diabetes of the Young (MODY) andgestational diabetes. In MODY, mutations occur in certain genes involved in insulin secre-tion by pancreatic β cells. This leads to a reduction in insulin secretion capacity. Gestationaldiabetes only occurs during pregnancy as a result of an increase in anti-insulin hormones,leading to insulin resistance and elevated blood sugar levels in the mother [5,9,19]. Thepresence of faulty insulin receptors can also result in a range of pathophysiological symp-toms and complications associated with diabetes, including polydipsia, polyuria, weightloss due to calorie loss in urine, increased appetite (polyphagia), impaired wound healing,susceptibility to gum and other infections, cardiovascular disease, eye damage, kidneydamage, nerve damage, and the risk of developing diabetic foot, diabetic ketoacidosis, andnon-ketotic hyperosmolarity [9,26].4. Medicinal Plant-Based Foods Recommended for the Treatment of DMThe management of DM is largely influenced by dietary habits and, in particular,the type of carbohydrates selected. The essential nutrients and phytochemicals found inwhole grain-containing foods (e.g., brown rice, brown flour oatmeal, quinoa, millet oramaranth, roasted sweet potatoes), for example, have beneficial effects on hyperglycemia.Incorporating fiber-rich vegetables into the diet is also an effective way to manage bloodglucose levels. Raw or lightly cooked vegetables, such as kale, spinach, and arugula, aswell as frozen and canned (low-sodium or unsalted) vegetables, are all other good optionsNutrients 2023, 15, 3266 5 of 41for a diabetes-friendly diet. Fruits, on the other hand, provide a source of carbohydrates,vitamins, minerals, and dietary fibers, but contain a higher amount of carbohydrates thanvegetables. It is recommended to choose fresh fruits, plain frozen fruit, canned fruitswithout added sugar, sugar-free or low-sugar jams or preserves, and no-sugar fruit-basedsauces to maintain optimal diabetes control [27]. Black beans, tofu, tempeh, peas, lentils,common beans, garbanzo beans, green beans, and focus beans are varieties of canned ordried beans that are good choices for plant-based proteins and dietary fibers with potentialantidiabetic effects. Studies have also suggested that the intake of dairy products, whichare high in proteins, can have insulin secretory capabilities and help with T2DM. Parmesancheese, ricotta cheese, cottage cheese, low-fat or skimmed milk, and low-fat Greek or plainyogurt are all excellent dairy additions to the diet. Moreover, proteins are generally highin fibers, low in fat, and take a long time to digest, generating relatively minor bloodsugar spikes. Skinless boneless chicken breast or strips, salmon, sardines, tuna, other oilyfish, white fish fillets, skinless turkey breasts, and eggs are also rich sources of proteins.The consumption of a diverse range of flavorings, seasonings, spices, herbs, and low-fator sugar-free dressings is also beneficial to the control of diabetes, as these enhance thepalatability of meals, promoting long-term compliance and ultimately better glycemiccontrol. Vinegar, olive oil, mustard, any spice or herb, spicy sauces, and salsa are all goodflavoring agents [28]. The section below discusses the antidiabetic effects of 20 commonplant-based foods and their phytochemicals.4.1. Althaea officinalis L.Althaea officinalis L., commonly referred to as Marshmallow, Alcea, or Althaea, isa perennial species of the mallow family (Malvaceae). It is widely recognized for itsmedicinal properties and has been used for centuries in traditional Persian medicine, whereit is referred to as Khatmi, Molukhia, or Panirak. In Western herbalism, it is known asAlthaea, Moorish Mallow, Mortification Root, Schloss Tea, Sweet Weed, Mallards, Cheese,and White Maoow [29–31]. The plant is commonly found in marshy areas, especially nearthe sea as well as in damp areas throughout Western Asia and Europe. In North America,Althaea officinalis L. is naturalized in salt marshes ranging from Massachusetts to Virginia.The plant has since spread to other regions and is now cultivated in various parts of WesternEurope and Russia [31].All parts of marshmallows are used in cuisine, including their leaves, flowers, androots [32]. The roots, leaves, and mucilage are used for medicinal purposes and containmany bioactive compounds such as flavonoids, coumarins, phenolic acids, and glyco-sides [29,33]. Marshmallow has been traditionally used for various diseases, including themanagement of diabetes and inflammation. Its use is widespread in Ayurvedic and Unaniherbal medicine as ointments, suppositories, enemas, compresses, plasters, incense, andfoot baths [29,31].The plant contains pectin (11%), starch (25–35%), flavonoids (quercetin, kaempferol),mono- and disaccharide including sucrose (10%), coumarins (scopoletin), phenolic acids(protocatechuic acid, vanilic acid, chlorogenic acid, caffeic acid, and p-coumaric acid),tannins, phytosterols, amino acids, vitamins, and minerals. The seeds containing linoleicacid and mucilage rich in galacturonic rhamnans, arabans, glucans, and arabinogalactanscan lower oxidative stress of clonal pancreatic β-cells and eventually alleviate diabeticinflammation [29,34].Both in vitro and in vivo investigations of A. officinalis have demonstrated its strongpotential for the treatment of DM. One study revealed that a marshmallow at a dose of 10, 30,and 100 mg/kg shows antihyperglycemic activity, reducing plasma glucose levels to 74%, 81%,and 65% of prior values measured before treatment in diabetic rats, respectively [31]. Anotherstudy reported that A. officinalis leaves (5% of the diet) significantly reduced cholesteroland serum glucose levels and markedly decreased glutamate pyruvate transaminase (GPT)in diabetic rats [33]. In addition, marshmallows, at doses of 250 mg/kg and 500 mg/kg,decreased blood glucose levels in streptozotocin (STZ)-induced diabetic animals compared toNutrients 2023, 15, 3266 6 of 41the control group [32]. Marshmallow has also demonstrated antioxidant activity, indicating itspotential to reduce oxidative stress and alleviate diabetes [34]. Diverse phytochemicals suchas flavonoids (quercetin, kaempferol), phenolic acids, tannins, and phytosterols are likely tocontribute to the antidiabetic effects observed for this plant [29].4.2. Anethum graveolens L.Anethum graveolens L. from the Apiaceae (Umbelliferae) family is commonly knownas ‘dill seeds’ or ‘dill weed’. This plant is found in Europe, throughout the Mediterraneanregion, as well as in central and southern Asia [35,36]. It is an annual or biennial aromaticherb widely cultivated across the world for commercial purposes [36]. Dill leaves arecommonly used as food enhancers and flavoring agents. The leaves, stems, and seeds ofthis plant are traditionally used to treat digestive disorders, bad breath, and hyperlipidemiaand to increase lactation and motivation [37,38].Dill is rich in flavonoids, terpenoids, alkaloids, tannins, and phytosterols, which areresponsible for the hypoglycemic effects of this plant. Alkaloids facilitate glucose transportto the peripheral tissues and stimulate insulin secretion, and saponin present in dill caninhibit AGE formation and heal diabetic neuropathy [38,39]. American dill has a highamount of α-phellandrene, while carvone and limonene are the main phytochemicals inAsian and European dill. The plant also contains lipids, proteins, carbohydrates, vitamin A,niacin, and various mineral elements (calcium, potassium, magnesium, phosphorus, andsodium) [39].Dill has been reported to display a range of biological activities, including anticancer,antimicrobial, antiulcer, antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, and hypolipidemic properties [40].It exerts its hypoglycemic effect mainly by interfering with antioxidant capacity and al-tering the expression of selected genes involved in the metabolism of glucose and lipids.Dill seed and leaf extracts, as well as its essential oil, have revealed hypolipidemic andhypoglycemic activities in diabetic mice, as evidenced by reduced triglycerides (TGs),total cholesterol, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C), very-low-density lipoproteincholesterol (VLDL-C) and glucose levels, and increased high-density lipoprotein cholesterol(HDL-C) levels [39]. Studies carried out in animals and in humans have established that onemonth was sufficient to assess the hypolipidemic and antidiabetic properties of dill [39,41].Dill increases LDL receptors in the liver and the uptake of LDL-C. It also inhibits the activ-ity of Acetyl-CoA carboxylase and HMG CoA (3-hydroxy 3- methylglutaryl-coenzyme A)reductase and decreases fatty acid formation and cholesterol absorption from the intestineby binding to bile acids [39].One study showed that dill markedly decreased AGE formation, protein glycation,and fructosamine levels and significantly reduced fasting blood glucose levels in diabeticanimals [38]. Another study reported that the administration of an aqueous dill extract todiabetic rats possesses radical scavenging/antioxidant activity and significantly reducesfructosamine levels, protein carbonyl content, and thiol group oxidation, as well as βamyloid protein formation and fragmentation [39,40]. This study also found that after twomonths of treatment with dill extract on diabetic rats, there was a significant decrease inboth blood glucose and AGE levels [40].4.3. Allium sativumAllium sativum (Alliaceae), more commonly known as Garlic, is one of the mostcultivated and used herbs for both culinary and medicinal purposes [42,43]. The plantmainly originates from Central Asia and Iran and has been used in cooking and medicinesince ancient times [44]. It is grown all over the world, but it was first cultivated in Asiabefore being naturalized in China, the Mediterranean region, Central and Southern Europe,Northern Africa, and Mexico [43,45].Garlic is a flowering perennial plant that grows from a bulb. Its cloves are used for culi-nary purposes and possess nutritional benefits [46]. The Egyptians, Greeks, Babylonians,and Romans traditionally used garlic for its healing properties. In 1858, Pasteur discoveredNutrients 2023, 15, 3266 7 of 41the antibacterial property of garlic, and it was later used during WWI and WWII as an anti-septic to prevent gangrene [45]. Garlic is used ethnomedicinally for a variety of purposes,including preventing infection, boosting immunity, and treating certain types of cancers,cardiovascular diseases, abdominal discomfort, diarrhea, respiratory tract infections, thecommon cold, asthma, hay fever, inflammation, fungal infections, hyperlipidemia, anddiabetes [44,46].Garlic contains 33 sulfur-containing compounds (mostly derived from the commonprecursor c-glutamylcysteine), 17 amino acids, various enzymes, and minerals such asselenium [45]. Sulfur compounds include ajoenes, thiosulfinates (allicin), vinyldithiins,sulfides, and alliin [47]. Additional constituents of intact garlic are lectins (the mostabundant proteins in garlic), prostaglandins, fructan, pectin, adenosine, vitamins B1, B2, B6,C, and E, biotin, nicotinic acid, fatty acids, glycolipids, phospholipids, and essential aminoacids [48]. Crushed garlic dry powder contains 1% of allin (S-allyl cysteine sulfoxide) andallicin (diallyl thiosulfonate) as their major constituents [45].The sulfur-containing constituents of garlic are rapidly absorbed, transformed, andmetabolized in the body [45,49]. Garlic has the ability to lower total cholesterol concentra-tions by approximately 10% and favorably alter HDL/LDL ratios. It can also lower bloodpressure, enhance fibrinolytic activity, reduce blood clotting, and inhibit platelet aggrega-tion. Moreover, it displays antioxidant and antidiabetic properties [45]. The antidiabeticeffect of garlic is attributed to its ability to reduce blood glucose levels by decreasing theabsorption of glucose from the intestinal tract. One study demonstrated that A. sativumincreased the diameter of pancreatic islets of STZ-induced diabetic rats. This compoundis a precursor of several other sulfur-containing compounds formed in aged or crushedgarlic preparations. Allicin can enhance serum insulin activity due to its free SH group,which has antioxidative properties. It can also normalize oxidative stress and increaseserum insulin levels in diabetic rats [43]. Aged garlic extract (AGE), containing compoundssuch as S-allylcysteine (SAC) and S-allylmercaptocysteine (SAMC), has been reported topossess even higher antioxidant and radical scavenging activity than a standard garlicextract. SAC has been reported to inhibit nitric oxide-induced intracellular oxidative stressin endothelial cells and reduce LDL oxidation and damage to endothelial cells causedby oxidized LDL. It can also scavenge intracellular peroxides and elevate intracellularGSH levels [49]. AGE has been demonstrated to decrease the risk of cardiovascular andcerebrovascular disease by inhibiting lipid peroxidation and LDL oxidation. Methiin, an-other sulfur-containing compound, and the flavonoid quercetin, both abundant in garlic,have been reported to reduce the severity of arteriosclerosis and lower serum cholesterollevels. Other compounds in garlic, such as steroidal saponins, have also been reported toreduce serum cholesterol concentrations [48]. Allicin is considered to be an effective insulinsecretagogue as it binds with cysteine and protects insulin against SH group interactions,preventing insulin inactivation [45].One study found that administering allicin at a dose of 200 mg/kg significantly improvedDM by reducing blood sugar levels, which was comparable to the standard antidiabetictherapeutic agents glibenclamide and insulin. On the other hand, aged garlic extract (5 and10 mL) prevented adrenal hypertrophy, hyperglycemia, and the rise of corticosterone onimmobilization stress in diabetic mice. Another study documented that garlic oil (100 mg/kg)and diallyl trisulfide (40 mg/kg) administered over a period of 3 weeks to STZ-diabetic ratsameliorated basal insulin and oral glucose tolerance [43]. Garlic oil at a dose of 100, 250, and500 mg/kg was also reported to significantly improve serum glucose, total cholesterol, TGs,urea, uric acid, creatinine, AST, and ALT in diabetic rats [49].4.4. Brassica oleracea L.Brassica oleracea L., also known as cabbage, is widely consumed across the world.Cabbage belongs to the Brassicaceae family, which includes other leafy vegetables such asbroccoli, Brussels sprout, cauliflower, and kale. The Brassicaceae family has its origins inthe Irano-Turanian Region and has since spread throughout the world. The entire cabbageNutrients 2023, 15, 3266 8 of 41plant, including its leafy flowers, is consumed either raw, cooked, or steamed. Cabbage is ashallow-rooted, cool-seasoned crop cultivated in varieties that include white cabbage, redcabbage, and savoy cabbage. It is a widely available and affordable vegetable with goodnutritional value. White cabbage is particularly popular, as it is low in calories and rich inbeneficial phytochemicals [50–52].Before it was introduced as food, cabbage was initially used as a traditional medicinefor headache, inflammation, digestion, various types of cancer, diarrhea, peptic ulcer, andgout as well as for detoxification purposes [51,52].Cabbage is rich in fibers, minerals (Ca, P, and K), vitamins (A, K, C, tocopherols, folate)as well as diverse phytochemicals, including glucosinolates (sulfur and s-methyl cysteinesulfoxide derivatives), anthocyanins, coumarins, saponins, flavonoids, carotenoids, tannins,alkaloids, phenolic compounds, phytosterols, terpenes, and indoles [52,53].In vitro studies have shown that cabbage can decrease postprandial hyperglycemia byinhibiting the activity of α-amylase and α-glucosidase, which are two enzymes responsiblefor the conversion of various oligosaccharides into free glucose after the consumption of car-bohydrates [53]. In a recent clinical study, the effect of oral supplementation of red cabbagewas evaluated on the glucose metabolism of STZ-induced diabetic rats. The results showedthat the oral supplementation of red cabbage led to a statistically significant decrease in thelevels of random blood glucose compared to the diabetic control group and to diabetic ratstreated with Glibenclamide. Additionally, the levels of glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) werefound to be significantly reduced compared to the diabetic control group [54]. Cabbage hasbeen demonstrated to control glucose homeostasis and improve hyperglycemic conditionsin T2DM sufferers. It exerts multi-target effects on glucose homeostatic regulation andcan mitigate organ damage in T2DM, particularly in the liver and kidney. It can alsoprevent problems underlying the development of T2DM, such as high oxidative stress andobesity [53]. It has been demonstrated that the regular consumption of white cabbage canlower LDL cholesterol and total serum cholesterol levels. White cabbage has free radicalscavenging/antioxidant activity and inhibits lipid peroxidation [51].Red cabbage is rich in anthocyanins. They are powerful antioxidant agents that havebeneficial effects in controlling chronic diseases associated with oxidative stress, such as car-diovascular diseases, DM, and other metabolic disorders. Polyphenols, like anthocyanins,have been demonstrated to improve the structural and functional irregularities of pancreaticbeta-cells in diabetes. Interestingly, other phenolic compounds such as flavonoids reduceplatelet aggregation and vascular smooth muscle cell proliferation, thus proving of interestin the prevention and treatment of diabetic vascular problems [55]. Among the variousvitamins found in cabbage, vitamin C has strong antioxidant properties. This vitamin cancounteract the damaging effects of oxidative stress as well as reduce the production ofpro-inflammatory cytokines, both involved in the pathogenesis of DM [50]. Vitamin Kexerts its beneficial effect on DM by elevating insulin sensitivity [53]. The fibers found incabbage, regardless of their type (soluble or insoluble), have been reported to ameliorateglucose control by reducing insulin resistance [54].4.5. Cicer arietinum L.Cicer arietinum (Chickpea) is one of the third most important and popular legume seedsworldwide and a good source of nutrients, especially proteins [56]. Chickpeas, also knownas garbanzo beans, are a variant of pulses that are dry seeds belonging to the Leguminosaefamily [57]. Although the leaves and fruits can be employed, it is mostly the seeds of thisplant that are used for consumption and medicinal purposes. Originating from Central andSouth America, the plant is now cultivated throughout the world [58]. India is currentlyregarded as the largest chickpea-cultivating country worldwide, contributing to about a67% share of global production [57]. The seeds of chickpeas can be consumed either in theirdried powder form or as cooked beans [56,59].Nutrients 2023, 15, 3266 9 of 41Chickpeas are rich in proteins, carbohydrates, minerals, fibers, vitamins, and phy-tochemicals such as anthocyanins, alkaloids, flavonoids, phytic acids, saponins, steroids,tannins, catechins, terpenoids, and trypsin inhibitors [58,60].Chickpeas are traditionally used for constipation, diarrhea, dyspepsia, flatulence,sunstroke, weight loss, and many other diseases [61]. The regular consumption of pulses,such as chickpeas, is recommended as part of a healthy lifestyle. Chickpeas are utilized asa dietary supplement in cases of metabolic syndrome and obesity as they contain severalbioactive compounds, such as flavonoids and anthocyanins [58]. Chickpeas have an-tioxidant, antidiarrheal, antidiabetic, anti-inflammatory, anticonvulsant, hepatoprotective,antimicrobial, and many other pharmacological effects [61].Chickpeas contain a variety of antioxidant phenolic compounds, such as flavonoidsand oligomeric and polymeric proanthocyanidins [62]. Chickpeas are rich in proteins suchas globulins (57%), glutelins (18%), albumins (12%), and prolamins (3%). Proteins are animportant source of peptides that can be released by hydrolysis, with beneficial healtheffects such as antioxidants (e.g., histidine) and antidiabetic activity by regulating insulinresistance and lipid metabolism [56]. Chickpeas also contain sulfur amino acids (e.g., me-thionine, cysteine), which have been reported to have antioxidant and anti-inflammatoryproperties that may aid DM via the attenuation of oxidative stress [60]. Such antioxidantproperties of chickpeas are also promising in improving glycemic control and total serumglucose concentrations [56]. The phenolic compounds present in chickpeas exert antidi-abetic activity by inhibiting carbohydrate hydrolyzing enzymes such as α-amylase andα-glucosidase, thus contributing to the management of T2DM [62]. Chickpeas have a low‘glycemic index’, which plays a crucial role in glycemic regulation and insulin secretion.The starch present in chickpeas is very resistant to intestinal digestion. This results ina lower availability of glucose to enter the bloodstream, leading to a reduced demandfor insulin [63]. The flavonoids in chickpeas have been reported to increase insulin re-ceptor activity, while phytosterol can stimulate insulin secretion from the pancreas [58].The isoflavones genistein, biochanin A, and formononetin have been reported to elicitantidiabetic and anti-hyperlipidemic effects in diabetic rats [64].A clinical study conducted for 8 weeks on 30 obese subjects consuming a legume-restricted vs. legume-based diet revealed that the legume-based diet significantly reducesbody weight, LDL cholesterol levels, systolic blood pressure, and total cholesterol levels [63].Another study found that the long-term oral administration of chickpea extract at a dose of200 mg/kg body weight has a notable hypoglycemic effect together with the inhibition offree radical production, lipid peroxidation, and the activation of antioxidant enzymes inthe liver and kidneys of STZ-induced diabetic rats [58].4.6. Cinnamomum verum J. Presl.The true cinnamon, also known as Sri Lanka or Ceylon cinnamon, is a brown-coloredspice with a delicate aroma and a warm sweet flavor that consists of the dried innerbark of Cinnamomum verum J. Presl (formerly called Cinnamomum zeylanicum) (Lauraceae).Among the 250 species of Cinnamomum, C. loureirii (Vietnamese cinnamon), C. burmannii(Indonesian cinnamon), and C. aromaticum (Cassia or Chinese cinnamon) are also used ascinnamon [65–68].Traditionally cinnamon has been used for cooking and flavoring beverages as well asmedicinally to treat arthritis, diarrhea, toothaches, bad breath, digestion, flatulence, piles,amoebiasis, heart diseases, fever, cough, colds, headaches, and menstrual irregularities. It isalso known to have antidiabetic properties along with anti-inflammatory, antibacterial, andantioxidant activity. It is commonly used as a dried powder or as an aqueous extract [67–69].The bark of cinnamon contains an essential oil, with 60–80% cinnamaldehyde as the maincomponent. Other minor phytoconstituents are o-methoxycinnamaldehyde, trans-cinnamicacid, vitamins, eugenol, monoterpenoids, procyanidins, diterpenes, phenylpropanoids, mu-cilage, tannins, flavonoids, glycosides, terpenoids, coumarins, anthraquinones, and polysac-charides. The leaves also contain 70–90% of eugenol [65]. Trace elements such as calcium,Nutrients 2023, 15, 3266 10 of 41chromium, copper, iodine, iron, manganese, phosphorus, potassium, and zinc have alsobeen isolated from cinnamon [66]. Its polyphenolic compounds have been reported toincrease glucose entry into cells by improving insulin receptor phosphorylation and thetranslocation of glucose transporter-4 (GLUT4) to the plasma membrane [69].Cinnamon has been shown to possess antidiabetic properties via its ability to reducethe digestion and absorption of carbohydrates [68]. The cinnamon extract can inhibitgastrointestinal enzymes, modulate insulin response and sensitivity, improve glucoseuptake, and inhibit gluconeogenesis. Cinnamon can reduce the formation of advanced-glycated end products in the gastrointestinal lumen during digestion, therefore, minimizingdiabetes complications by reducing oxidative stress, inflammation, and islet cell injury [70].Cinnamon has been reported to exert a beneficial effect on DM in multiple ways. It hasinsulin secretory activity [67]. It can also increase the expression of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPAR) α and γ, as well as increase insulin sensitivity. Furthermore, itcan inhibit the intestinal glucosidase and the pancreatic amylase enzymes, thus delayingthe gastric emptying time and postprandial glucose concentrations [69].It contains antioxidants that can inhibit ROS generation and prevent diabetes at theprediabetes state [68]. It also contains double-linked procyanidin type-A polymers, pri-marily composed of flavonoids such as catechin and epicatechin. These polymers aretypically found as trimers and tetramers and possess health-promoting properties, in-cluding antidiabetic effects [66,71]. It also contains polyphenol type-A polymers withinsulinotropic activity that can inhibit tyrosine phosphatase leading to the inhibition of thede-phosphorylation and activation of the phosphorylation of insulin [67,68]. The hydrox-ycinnamic acids from Cinnamomum aromaticum have been identified as active ingredientswith high glucose transport activity. In their esterified form, they increase glucose transportvia GLUT4 translocation and enhance the phosphorylation of IR-ß (Insulin Receptor β) andIRS-1 (Insulin Receptor Substrate-1) in adipocytes [71]. One study showed that cinnamalde-hyde could lower blood glucose and glycosylated hemoglobin concentrations, as wellas significantly increase plasma insulin and hepatic glycogen concentrations and restorealtered plasma enzymes (aspartate aminotransferase, alanine aminotransferase, lactatedehydrogenase, alkaline phosphatase, and acid phosphatase) back to normal levels [67]. Inanother study, a significant reduction in fasting blood glucose and glycosylated hemoglobinlevels was observed in T2DM patients after 6 to 12 weeks of daily treatment with 1g ofcinnamon. There was also an improvement in the oxidative stress markers [69]. Anotherinvestigation showed that the administration of C. aromaticum bark extracts at a dose of200 mg/kg body weight for 6 weeks could notably lower blood glucose, TGs, and totalcholesterol concentrations, as well as inhibit intestinal α-glucosidase in diabetic mice [68].4.7. Crocus sativus L.Crocus sativus (Iridaceae) is a perennial herb with significant importance in medicine,cosmetics, food, and hygiene. It is commonly referred to as “saffron crocus” since it isderived from the dried stigmas of the crocus flower. The latter is widely cultivated incountries with mild to dry climates. [72,73]. Saffron petals are also being used for theircurative properties [74]. Saffron is reputed for its diaphoretic, expectorant, eupeptic,abortifacient, tranquilizer, aphrodisiac, and emmenagogue properties and is traditionallyused for the treatment of hepatic disorders, flatulence, spasms, insomnia, vomiting, dentaland gingival pain, depression, seizures, cognitive disorders, lumbago, asthma, cough,bronchitis, colds, fever, cardiovascular disorders, cancer and metabolic syndromes likediabetes and hyperlipidemia [75,76].Saffron contains a vast array of phytochemicals, including the carotenoids crocetin,crocin (crocetin glycoside), and picrocrocin. Saffron also comprises safranal and over 150 otheraroma-yielding volatile compounds [77]. Saffron petals also contain flavonoids (kaempferol),carotenoids, anthocyanins, phenolic compounds, terpenoids, alkaloids, protein, fibers, sodium,potassium, calcium, copper, iron, magnesium, zinc, and phosphorus [74].Nutrients 2023, 15, 3266 11 of 41Crocin, crocetin, and safranal are the three main active compounds of saffron that havepotent antidiabetic effects. The distinct coloration of saffron is primarily attributed to thepresence of crocin, while safranal is responsible for its unique aroma [76]. The antidiabeticeffects of these components have been demonstrated via their inhibition of free radical chainreactions and their ability to stabilize biological membranes, scavenge reactive oxygen species,and reduce the peroxidation of unsaturated membrane lipids [75]. Moreover, crocin has beenreported to significantly reduce plasma levels of TGs and total cholesterol by activating lowto moderate PPARα, together with improving high glucose levels, insulin resistance, andatherosclerosis [76]. It can stimulate the islet cells of Langerhans to increase insulin secretionand ameliorate diabetic neuropathy. It also exerts blood glucose-lowering effects by sensitizingthe insulin receptors in peripheral muscles [78]. The phosphorylation of mitogen-activatedprotein kinases (MAPK) and Acetyl-CoA carboxylase (ACC) by saffron bioactive constituentshas been found to significantly improve peripheral insulin sensitivity [79].An ethanol extract of saffron has been reported to decrease TG, TC, and LDL andincrease HDL levels [76]. Previous studies showed that oral administration of saffronextract could improve serum levels, body weight, lipid profile, and blood glucose, as wellas the augmentation of kidney and liver functions in alloxan-induced diabetic rats [72].Another study demonstrated that saffron extracts, at doses of 200, 400, and 600 mg/kg,cause significant improvements in serum insulin levels and noticeable reductions in bloodglucose levels in diabetic rats [75]. A methanolic extract of saffron, containing crocin andsafranal, has been reported to notably reduce fasting blood glucose and HbA1c levels inalloxan-induced diabetic rats [80].4.8. Cuminum cyminum L.Cuminum cyminum (cumin) (Apiaceae) is the most abundant herb cultivated world-wide, after black pepper. It is cultivated in many countries, especially those with semi-aridclimates, such as China, India, Iran, Egypt, Saudi Arabia, and the Mediterranean [81,82].Cumin seeds are utilized for culinary and medicinal purposes. Traditionally, they arecommonly employed for treating chronic diarrhea, dyspepsia, asthma, hypertension, fever,inflammation, bronchitis, dizziness, eczema, gastrointestinal disturbances, and diabetes [83].They are also renowned for their antispasmodic, abortifacient, diuretic, emmenagogue,carminative, and stomachic properties [84].Cumin possesses highly valued phytochemicals such as terpenes (β-pinene), phe-nols (eugenol), alcohols and aldehydes (cuminaldehyde), flavonoids (luteolin, catechin,quercetin and apigenin), alkaloids, coumarins, anthraquinones, saponins, tannins, steroids,as well as proteins, resins, fibers, fats (especially monounsaturated), vitamins and minerals.Phenolic acids (gallic, cinnamic, rosmarinic, coumaric, and vanillic acids) are also presentin cumin seeds [83,85].Cumin seeds have been shown to significantly reduce body weight and lower bloodglucose, glycosylated hemoglobin, phospholipid, cholesterol, free fatty acid, and TG levelsfrom the plasma and tissues [83]. They are also effective in exerting antioxidant protectiveeffects on insulin-secreting β cells and enhancing insulin secretion. Cuminaldehyde is themain active constituent with potential antidiabetic properties which has inhibitory effectson aldose reductase and α-glucosidase. It also exhibits insulinotropic effects by blockingATP-sensitive potassium channels and increasing intracellular calcium concentration inpancreatic β cells together with possessing protective effects on pancreatic β cells [86].Cumin extract has been reported to suppress α-amylase activity, elevated ROS generation,and oxidative injury by optimizing rapamycin (mTOR), surviving, and beclin-1 (BECN1)levels. Cumin also promotes catalase, glutathione reductase, and peroxidase activitiesand increases ascorbic acid levels, which protect cells against damage caused by oxidativestress [85]. Cuminaldehyde, and the flavonoids present in cumin, not only counteract thedamage caused by oxidative stress but can also prevent AGE formation, which is involvedin the pathogenesis of diabetic microvascular complications [81].Nutrients 2023, 15, 3266 12 of 41One clinical study reported that green cumin (50 or 100 mg/kg/day) could notablyimprove hyperglycemia and insulin sensitivity after 8 weeks of treatment in T2DM sub-jects [86]. A similar study with cumin seeds has reported that cumin could improve fastingblood glucose and glycosylated hemoglobin levels and inhibit α-amylase activity [82].4.9. Eugenia caryophyllata Thunb.Eugenia caryophyllata (Myrtaceae) is a tree native to Indonesia and is now cultivated inmany countries worldwide. Syzygium aromaticum and Eugenia caryophyllata are synonyms.The spice known as clove corresponds to the dried unopened flower buds of the plant.Clove is used for culinary purposes and ethnomedicine [87–89]. The stems, leaves, andfruits of E. caryophyllata can also be used for medicinal and cooking purposes [87]. Cloveis reputed for its beneficial effects on a variety of ailments, including dental problems,nausea, liver, bowel and stomach disorders, vomiting, flatulence, scabies, cholera, malaria,tuberculosis, bacterial and protozoal infections, and food-borne pathogens. Clove can alsoact as a stimulant for the nerves [88,90].The main phytoconstituents isolated from the clove are phenolic volatile compoundssuch as eugenol (78%), β-caryophyllene (13%), α-humulene, caryophyllene oxide, andacetyleugenol [91,92]. Clove also contains tetraethylammonium chloride, gallic acid, phe-nolic acids, polyphenols, and flavonol glycosides with free radical scavenging/antioxidantactivity [89]. Isoeugenol has proven to be beneficial for T2DM management, owing to itsinhibitory effects against α-glycosidase and α-amylase [93].A clove extract has been reported to act like insulin by reducing phosphoenolpyruvatecarboxykinase (PEPCK) and glucose-6-phosphatase (G6Pase) gene expression in hepa-tocytes and hepatoma cells [87]. Tannins, flavonoids, ellagic acid, gallic acid, and theirglycosides isolated from an alcoholic and aqueous extract of clove buds have also beenreported to exert hypoglycemic activity [90]. Studies have also revealed that the dietarysupplementation of cloves significantly reduces elevated blood sugar levels and lipid per-oxidation in STZ-induced diabetic rats while restoring the antioxidant enzymatic level [91].Another in vivo experiment demonstrated that eugenol, at a dose of 100 mg/kg for 4 days,suppresses the oxidative stress caused by gentamicin and was effective in dyslipidemia [90].4.10. Foeniculum vulgare Mill.Foeniculum vulgare (Umbelliferae or Apiaceae) is an aromatic Mediterranean plantcommonly known as fennel. Its seeds are used as a flavoring agent in food or traditionalmedicine and consumed as a medicinal tea. Traditionally, fennel has been used as anappetite suppressant to ease childbirth, increase milk secretion, promote menstruation,ease male menopause, and increase libido [94–97].Fennel seeds contain an essential oil rich in trans-anethole, fenchone, limonene, cam-phor, and α-pinene. They also contain a fixed oil with free fatty acids (petroselinic acid andoleic acid) and tocopherols [95].Fennel exerts antitumor, antioxidant, cytoprotective, cancer chemopreventive, hepato-protective, and hypoglycemic activities [98]. Fennel oil possesses pro-oxidant, antioxidant,and anti-inflammatory effects [95]. Fennel seeds can inhibit glutathione peroxidase (GSHPx),α-amylase, and α-glucosidase, thus delaying the breakdown of carbohydrates [96].An extract prepared from fennel mixed with Cassia angustifolia has been reported toimprove body weight, serum cholesterol, TGs, LDL, HDL, oxidative stress, MDA, SOD,CAT, and GSH levels in STZ-induced diabetic rats. The hypoglycemic effect of fennel seedsmay be mediated via the preservation of pancreatic β-cell integrity [98]. The essentialoil of F. vulgare ameliorated hyperglycemia, glutathione levels, and kidney and pancreasfunctions in STZ-induced diabetic rats [95]. An extract from fennel seeds, and its maincompound trans-anethole, were reported to improve liver tissue damage, liver enzymefunction, blood glucose levels, lipid profile, body weight, and food and fluid intake inSTZ-induced diabetic rats [96].Nutrients 2023, 15, 3266 13 of 414.11. Hordeum vulgare L.Hordeum vulgare (Poaceae), also known as barley, is one of the highest dietary fiber-containing crops and is currently the fourth most cultivated cereal crop in the world [99]. Itis also one of the most cultivated grains, particularly in Eurasia. Barley is a popular andaffordable dietary source of high fiber. Its grains, leaves, and sprouts are used for theirantioxidant, hypolipidemic, antidepressant, and antidiabetic effects. Barley is also usedfor skin abnormalities, arthritis, digestive diseases, weight loss, cancer, and its detoxifyingproperties [100–102].Barley is mainly rich in β-glucan, starch, proteins, minerals, and soluble fiber [103]. Italso contains arabinoxylans, phenolics (derivatives of ferulic acid, vanillic acid, syringicacid, and p-coumaric acid), flavonoids (flavonols and anthocyanins), tocols (tocopherolsand tocotrienols), lignans, phytosterols and folates [104].Its soluble fibers possess beneficial effects on metabolic syndromes, lipid metabolism,high blood glucose levels, and bowel function [101]. Among its minerals, K+ plays animportant role in preventing Alzheimer’s disease and hypertension and lowering oxidativestress. Furthermore, the presence of sulfide and quercetin also helps to reduce inflammationand obesity and to aid heart diseases and diabetes [99]. β-glucan, the main bioactivechemical in barley, has been demonstrated to lower total cholesterol by inhibiting hepaticcholesterol synthesis. Soluble fiber from barley undergoes fermentation in the colon andfurther leads to the formation of small-chain fatty acids, which are absorbed easily and areable to inhibit hepatic cholesterol synthesis [103]. Barley is a potent α-glucosidase inhibitor.It can also reduce the postprandial glucose response and improve insulin resistance. Itsvitamins, minerals, β-glucan, phenolics, and flavonoids (ferulic acid, naringin, and catechin)have demonstrated hypoglycemic activity by inhibiting α-glucosidase and α-amylase [104].One study has reported that barley extract significantly reduces blood glucose levels indiabetic rats but not normal rats. The mechanism is similar to that of insulin secretagoguessuch as biguanides or α-glucosidase inhibitors, resulting in decreased insulin resistance andinterfering with carbohydrates absorption or metabolism [101]. Another study revealedthat the repeated consumption of 10% w/v barley water and its components, such as aminoacids, in alloxan-induced diabetic rats could restore changes in the immunological andbiochemical parameters to their normal levels, indicating antidiabetic activity [102].4.12. Juglans regia L.Juglans regia (Juglandaceae), commonly known as walnut, is a plant with numeroustherapeutic benefits in traditional medicine [105]. Traditionally, walnut fruits and leaveshave been employed in pharmaceuticals as astringent, antiseptic, and anti-hyperglycemicagents to mitigate diabetic complications [106,107].Walnut leaf, fruit, and flower are rich in phytoconstituents such as vitamin C, vitamin E,β-carotene, lipoic acid, quercetin, naphthoquinones, flavonoids (quercetin), gallic acid,polyphenols (caffeoylquinic acid), linoleic and linolenic acids, tannins, and folates [108,109].Several of these constituents have strong antioxidant/free-radical scavenging activity,along with antidiabetic effects. Walnut is able to decrease blood glucose levels withthe phenols present in their leaves. It has also been reported to increase insulin andreduce HbA1c levels in T2DM patients via mechanisms similar to those of metformin andglibenclamide. Walnut leaf extract exerts antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, and anti-apoptoticeffects, which help with diabetes complications. The flavonoids (e.g., quercetin) can activelydecrease blood glucose levels by inhibiting the GLUT2 glucose transporter, suppressingglucose intestinal absorption. Phenolic acids (e.g., caffeoylquinic acid) can inhibit glucose-6-phosphate translocase, leading to a reduction in hepatic glucose production and loweringblood glucose and HbA1C levels [106,108,109].One study revealed that walnut bark extracts alleviate DM complications, while leavesand fleshy green fruits improve blood glucose. An infusion of walnut and olive leaves hasbeen reported as a good combination of plants to lower blood glucose [105]. Clinical studiesNutrients 2023, 15, 3266 14 of 41have confirmed that walnut is a strong hypoglycemic agent, lowering fasting blood glucose,HbA1c, cholesterol, and TGs while increasing insulin levels with few side effects [106].4.13. Lens culinaris L.Lens culinaris (Leguminosae), also known as lentils, is a widely cultivated pulse cropworldwide with notable health benefits [110,111]. Lentil seeds and sprouts have a highnutritional and medicinal value. They are rich in quality fiber, protein, and starch and arelow in fat [112]. Due to their high protein content, lentils have been used traditionally as ameat substitute among poor people [113].Lentils contain polyphenols, phytates, triterpenoids, defensins, phytosterols, flavonoids,saponins, protease inhibitors, dietary fibers, and lectins, among which saponins andpolyphenols are potent radical scavengers and HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors [114].The regular consumption of lentils has been reported to lower the glycemic load,fasting blood sugar, and glycemic index while improving the lipid profile and lipoproteinmetabolism in both diabetic and healthy individuals [113]. Interestingly, the enzymatichydrolysis of lentils increases their antioxidant/free-radical scavenging and antidiabetic ef-fects [115]. Several phytoconstituents have been reported to exert preventive and therapeu-tic effects on chronic diabetes and hyperlipidemia. Polyphenols and flavonoids have beenshown to contribute to the antidiabetic, anti-obesity, antioxidant, and anti-inflammatoryproperties of lentils [113,114]. The presence of fiber has also been shown to help improvemetabolic impairment and glycemic control in both T1DM and T2DM patients. Along witha glucose-lowering effect, the lentils can reduce glucose poisoning or the damaging effectsof glucose associated with the destruction of pancreatic β cells [116]. The polyphenols,flavonoids, and fiber content in lentil seeds altogether play a significant role in promot-ing gut motility and preventing metabolic impairment in diabetic rats [113]. Phenoliccompounds have an effect on α-glucosidase and lipid digestion, thus helping to maintainglucose and lipid homeostasis [117].4.14. Nigella sativa L.Nigella sativa L. (Ranunculaceae), also known as black cumin, is a medicinal plantused for a variety of ailments, including digestive disorders, dyspepsia, dyspnea, chronicdiarrhea, blotting, colds, spider bites, toothaches, warts, headaches, and diabetes. Its seedsare commonly used as a spice [81,118–121].Black cumin seeds contain a volatile oil rich in low-molecular-weight terpenoids(carvone, thymoquinone, and thymol) and a fixed oil rich in fatty acids (linoleic acid, oleicacid, palmitic acid). They also contain mucilage, alkaloids, organic acids, tannins, reducingsugars, saponins, resins, phytosterols and steryl esters, amino acids, as well as vitaminsand minerals [120,122]. Black cumin roots contain antidiabetic phenolic compounds [121].The thymoquinone present in N. sativa can lower blood glucose levels via extra pancreaticactions [122].Black cumin seeds have been reported to possess antimicrobial, antipyretic, spas-molytic, antioxidant, antihypertensive, anti-inflammatory, antihistaminic, antitumor, an-tifertility, antibacterial, cardiovascular, and hypoglycemic properties [118,121]. N. sativaalso has insulinotropic properties via the maintenance of pancreas β-cell integrity. Theoil from its seeds (which contains high amounts of thymoquinone) can significantly de-crease serum glucose, LDL cholesterol, TGs, total cholesterol, alanine aminotransferase,and aspartate aminotransferase levels [123]. Black cumin seeds have been reported toreduce the plasma concentrations of glucose, cholesterol, and TGs [121]. Black cumin seedsalso induce the proliferation of pancreatic β-cells, increase insulin secretion, activate theAMPK pathway, and stimulate glucose uptake in skeletal muscle cells and adipocytes [119].An intake of black cumin seeds (2 g twice daily) has been reported to decrease the bloodglucose levels of diabetic individuals [122].Black cumin seed oil administered to STZ- and nicotinamide-induced diabetic ham-sters improved blood glucose and serum albumin levels via insulinotropic effects onNutrients 2023, 15, 3266 15 of 41pancreatic β-cells. The volatile oil administered intraperitoneally produced a notable hy-poglycemic effect in alloxan-induced diabetic rabbits [122]. In another study, an ethanolextract of N. sativa seeds was found to enhance insulin secretion from pancreatic β-cellsand increase glucose uptake in muscle and fat cells. After 18 h of treatment, the extractenhanced glucose-stimulated insulin secretion by more than 35% without affecting glucosesensitivity and accelerated β-cell proliferation. Basal glucose uptake was increased by 55%in muscle cells and approximately 400% in adipocytes, indicating that black cumin seedshave insulinotropic and insulin-like properties [119]. The active constituent of N. sativaseeds, thymoquinone showed potent radical scavenging activity both in vitro and in vivo,which can be beneficial in reducing T2DM-associated oxidative stress [122].4.15. Olea europaea L.The olive, Olea europaea L. (Oleaceae), is best known for its fruits, which yield oliveoil when mechanically pressed [124,125]. The plant is extensively cultivated and used forcooking, cosmetics, and medicinal purposes. It is native to many countries in the worldexcept for tropical, subtropical, and hot temperate regions. It is commonly found in theMediterranean zone [124].The fruit pit contains 20–30% oil. The latter is rich in flavonoids, iridoids, triterpenes(oleanolic acid), benzoic acid derivatives, secoiridoids (oleuropein), phenolic compounds,isochromans, and other classes of secondary metabolites. Recent studies have reported thatoleanolic acid can reduce blood glucose levels and improve glucose tolerance and plasmainsulin levels by acting as an agonist on TGR5, bile acid surface receptor [124,125].Olive oil is traditionally used for hypertension, inflammation, diarrhea, respiratorydisorders, urinary tract infections, hemorrhoids, rheumatism, stomach and intestinal dis-orders, asthma, and diabetes and as a laxative, mouth cleanser, and vasodilator. It is alsoknown to reduce blood sugar, cholesterol, and uric acid levels [124]. The leaves also havenotable pharmacological properties such as antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, antiarrythmatic,hypotensive, and immunostimulatory effects [125,126].Olive oil possesses anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, cardioprotective, anticonvulsant,immunomodulatory, antinociceptive, gastroprotective, analgesic, antimicrobial, antiviral,antihypertensive, anticancer, wound healing, and antihyperglycemic activities [124,127].The phenol-enriched olive oil has been reported to inhibit α-glucosidase, indicating itspotential in the management of T2DM [128]. Hydroxytyrosol and oleuropein from olive oilexert antihyperglycemic activity via the inhibition of α-glucosidase and act as antioxidantagents [129]. Oleanolic acid, one of the main active phytoconstituents of olive oil, hasalso been demonstrated to improve insulin action and sensitivity and promote β-cellssurvival and proliferation via the inhibition of cytokine production in STZ-induced diabeticmice [130]. A polyphenol-rich extract of olive oil showed antioxidant properties and pre-served cellular GSH levels, which may alleviate oxidative damage in T2DM patients [131].4.16. Pinus gerardiana Wall. ex D. DonPinus gerardiana (Pinaceae) is also known as chilgoza pine, pine nut, or chilgozaseed [132]. Pine nuts are used as food, either raw or roasted, and in traditional medicine asa diuretic, expectorant, antibacterial, antiseptic, antifungal, antihypertensive, antiviral, andantineuralgic agent [133].Nuts are rich in fatty acids (stearic acid, gallic acid, ellagic acid, linolenic acid, oleic acid,arachidic acid, and palmitic acid), tocopherols, carotenoids, phytosterols, carbohydrates,proteins, minerals, and vitamins [132,134].Chilgoza nuts have been reported to promote weight loss, reduce oxidative stress, fast-ing blood glucose levels, and malondialdehyde, and increase total thiol groups, superoxidedismutase enzyme activity, and the total antioxidant capacity of serums and livers [135].Gallic acid and ellagic acid, two phenolic compounds present in chilgoza, can decreasethe expression of the PPARγ gene and activate Akt (protein kinase B). They also protectpancreatic β-cells, induce insulin secretion, and reduce glucose intolerance, thus helping inNutrients 2023, 15, 3266 16 of 41the management of DM [135]. A pine nut extract has been demonstrated to lower bloodglucose levels, reduce body weight and hyperlipidemia, and improve liver and kidneyfunctions in STZ-induced diabetic rats. Its beneficial effect in DM has been attributed to thepresence of phenolic compounds and flavonoids. These compounds also contribute a nor-moglycemic effect via α-amylase inhibition and act as antioxidant agents, thus preventingdiabetic complications. They also play a role in regulating glycolytic and gluconeogenicactivities, including hexokinase, glucose-6-phosphatase, fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase, andglycogen phosphorylase [136].4.17. Piper nigrum L.Piper nigrum (Piperaceae), also known as black pepper, is a plant native to India andother tropical countries. Its single round-shaped seed is commonly used for culinary,preservation, flavoring, and medicinal purposes. P. nigrum (seeds, flowers, fruits, andleaves) is also widely used for its ethnomedicinal properties, particularly in Asia. Theplant is reputed to relieve pain, menstrual problems, atrophic arthritis, digestive problems,apathy, influenza, and fever as a nerve tonic [137–140].Black pepper contains an essential oil that is rich in piperine. Other isolated com-pounds found in the oil are β-caryophyllene, limonene, sabinene, α-pinene, β-bisabolene,α-copaene, α-cadinol, α-thujene, and α-humulene. Black pepper leaves are rich in nerolidoland α-pinene [141]. Other secondary metabolites found in black pepper are alkaloids (e.g.,piperine), glycosides, terpenoids, steroids, flavonoids, tannins, and anthraquinones [137].Black pepper possesses antibacterial, anti-inflammatory, antipyretic, anti-snake venom,antiplatelet, antihypertensive, anticancer, antioxidant, analgesic, antidepressant, antidiar-rheal, and antidiabetic properties [141]. Phytoconstituents such as piperine isolated fromblack pepper also exhibit antioxidant properties. Moreover, a combination of piperine andhydroxytyrosol has been reported to exhibit radical scavenging properties, increase insulinsecretion, improve white adipose tissue formation, lower blood glucose, lipid peroxidation,and lipogenesis via the modulation of the transcription factors NF-κB, Nrf2, SREBP-1c,and PPAR-γ as well as their target genes [141–143]. Piperine has been shown to reducelipid peroxidation while activating antioxidant enzymes in diabetic animals [144]. Onestudy revealed that a combination of black pepper, turmeric, and palm dates increasesinsulin and HDL levels, lowers blood glucose, TGs, total cholesterol, and LDL levels, andshows antioxidant capacity in diabetic rats, indicating the potential of black pepper in themanagement of DM [143].4.18. Pistacia vera L.Pistacia vera (Anacardiaceae) has significant economic importance worldwide. Theplant is commonly known as pistachios, used for its fruits, seeds, and leaves for bothculinary and medicinal purposes [145,146]. The shells, roots, and stems parts also containpharmacologically important constituents [147]. Pistachios are native to Asia and theMediterranean region [148]. Traditionally, pistachios have been used for their diuretic,antidiabetic, and anti-inflammatory properties, as well as for strengthening gums, coughs,chills, asthma, stomach aches, abscesses, bruises, itching and sores, chest ailments, rheuma-tism, gynecological issues, and as a topical remedy for hemorrhoids [146,149].Pistachios contain oleoresins, polyphenols, triterpenoids, polymeric procyanidins,flavonols, anthocyanins, and pistacionic acids [150].Studies have indicated that the Pistacia genus possesses various biological activi-ties, including anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, antimicrobial, antiviral, anti-osteoarthritis,anti-gout, anti-epileptic, sedative-hypnotic, muscle-relaxant, anti-fatigue, wound-healing(diabetic wound) and second-degree burn healing, anti-colitis, anti-peptic ulcer, neuropro-tective, hypoglycemic, hepatoprotective, lipid-lowering, anti-obesity, nephroprotective,and antidiabetic properties [145]. Pistacia has also demonstrated strong antihypertensiveeffects via inhibiting the angiotensin-converting enzyme-1, thereby providing beneficialeffects in the cardiovascular complications associated with DM [145].Nutrients 2023, 15, 3266 17 of 41One study revealed that pistacionic acid exhibits antidiabetic activity by inhibitingα-glucosidase and α-amylase [147]. Another study demonstrated that P. vera has inhibitoryactivity on α-amylase, α-glucosidase, pancreatic lipase, and cholesterol esterase enzymesinvolved in carbohydrate digestion, thereby delaying carbohydrate digestion, loweringglucose absorption, and decreasing blood glucose levels. Moreover, P. vera extract is alsoreported to exhibit antioxidant activity in in vitro models, which may reduce oxidativestress and contribute to the improvement of T2DM [149].4.19. Vitis vinifera L.Vitis vinifera (Vitaceae) is a plant identified as a wine grape or raisin. Traditionally,grapes have been valued for their use in winemaking. They also have nutritional benefitsand the potential as a functional food. The dried, seedless grapes produce raisins, whichare consumed widely for their health-promoting effects [151–153].Raisins are rich in polyphenols (e.g., kaempferol, quercetin, and ellagic acid), phenolicacids, caftaric acid, citric acid, vanillic acid, stilbenes (e.g., trans-resveratrol), protocatechuic,ferulic, caffeic, gallic, syringic, and p-coumaric acids. Raisins are also rich in dietary fiber [154].The pharmacological properties of raisins include antioxidant, antidiabetic, immunomod-ulatory, neuroprotective, anticarcinogenic, anti-obesity, and anti-aging effects [155]. The con-sumption of raisins has been linked to improvements in blood glucose control, reduction inpostprandial glucose, HbA1c, and blood pressure levels. Furthermore, raisins are rich in an-tioxidant compounds (e.g., ellagic acid, trans-resveratrol), which can inhibit LDL cholesteroloxidation by scavenging free radicals and improve metabolic syndromes such as DM [152,155].One study found that a 6-month dietary intervention using raisins resulted in asignificant increase in the plasma total antioxidant potential of T2DM patients. Additionally,fiber-rich raisin also exhibits potent hypocholesterolemic activity [154].4.20. Zingiber officinale RoscoeZingiber officinale (Zingiberaceae), also known as ginger, is a medicinal plant nativeto Asia. Its roots and rhizomes are used as a spice and flavoring agent and for medicinalpurposes [156–158]. Traditionally, ginger has been used to treat digestive disorders, nausea,rheumatism, respiratory conditions, cough, bleeding, baldness, toothache, diabetes, hyperc-holesterolemia, neurological diseases, asthma, stroke, constipation, and cancer [158,159].Ginger mainly contains monoterpenes, including oxygenated monoterpenes, such asgeranial, linalool, borneol, citronellal, neral, and α-terpineol, as well as sesquiterpenes includ-ing zingiberene, zingiberenol, α- and β-farnesene, ar-curcumene, copaene, and cadinene [156].The gingerols, shogaols, and volatile oils are the main contributors to the pharmacologicaleffects of ginger [159]. Its antidiabetic properties are attributed to phenolic (diarylheptanoidsand diarylheptanoid-derived gingerols and shogaols), as well as non-phenolic compounds(sesquiterpene and monoterpene hydrocarbons, carbonyl compounds, and esters). Gingeralso exhibits strong antioxidant/radical scavenging activity, therefore, mitigating diabeticcomplications [158,160,161]. Ginger has been reported to strongly inhibit α-glucosidase whilemildly inhibiting α-amylase as well as effectively reduce serum glucose, cholesterol, and TGslevels together with eliminating proteinuria associated with diabetic nephropathy [159,162]. Itcan also increase HDL cholesterol concentrations and improve insulin sensitivity [44,157].One study showed that a hydroalcoholic extract of ginger at a dose of 400 mg/kglowers blood glucose and increases body weight and serum insulin in STZ-induced diabeticrats [156]. Gingerols were found to inhibit both prostaglandin and leukotriene biosynthesisas well as angiogenesis, which may attenuate inflammation associated with diabetes [159].Another study in STZ-induced diabetic rats showed that ginger significantly lowers bloodglucose levels and decreases oxidative stress and body weight, thus demonstrating antidia-betic and antihyperlipidaemic roles [160].The summary of the pharmacology of 20 common medicinal plant-based diets, spe-cific antidiabetic phytoconstituents, and their chemical structures have been shown inTables 1–3, respectively.Nutrients 2023, 15, 3266 18 of 41Table 1. Traditional uses and pharmacological effects of the selected antidiabetic medicinal plants.Medicinal Plants Plants Parts Traditional Uses Recipients Pharmacological Effects Dose Administered Duration ofTreatment ReferencesAlthaea officinalis L. Leaves, flowers,rootsDiabetes, inflammation, skininfection, digestive andrespiratory disordersAlloxan-induceddiabetic rats↓ Glutamate pyruvatetransaminase (GPT), ↓cholesterol, ↓ serum glucoselevels, ↓ alkaline phosphatelevel (APL)Powdered leaves (5%of the diet) 28 days [33]Anethum graveolens L. Leaves, stems, andseedsDiabetes, digestivedisorders, cancer, microbialinfections, inflammation,hyperlipidemia,STZ-induceddiabetic rats↓ Inflammatory cytokines, ↓triglycerides, ↓ totalcholesterol, ↓ LDL-C, ↓VLDL-C, ↓ blood glucose, ↓AGEs, ↓ protein glycation, ↓fructosamine level, ↓ fastingblood glucose300 mg/mL 56 days [38,39]Allium sativum L. PulpDiabetes, respiratory tractdisorders, bacterial andfungal infections, wounds,cancers, CVDs, abdominaldiscomfort, diarrhea, cold,asthma, hay fever,inflammation, obesitySTZ-induceddiabetic rats↓ LDL, ↓ total cholesterol, ↓oxidative stress, ↑ HDL, ↓blood glucose, ↓ intestinalglucose absorption, ↓ ROSgeneration, ↑ intracellularGSH content, ↓ endothelialdysfunction200 mg/kg 21 days [43–45]Brassica oleracea L. LeavesInflammation, digestivedisorders, cancer, pepticulcer, gout, detoxificationSTZ-induceddiabetic rats↑ Glucose homeostaticregulation, ↓ organ damagefrom T2DM, ↓ oxidative stress,↓ obesity, ↓ LDL cholesterol, ↓total cholesterol, ↓ lipidperoxidation, ↑ pancreaticβ-cells functions250 mg/kg 40 days [52,53,55]Cicer arietinum L. Leaves, fruits,seedsDiabetes, constipation,diarrhea, dyspepsia,flatulence, weight loss,inflammation, microbialinfectionsSTZ-induceddiabetic rats↑ Glycemic control, ↓ totalcholesterol, ↓ α-amylase andα-glucosidase activity, ↑insulin secretion and receptoractivity, ↓ insulin deficiency, ↓LDL200 mg/kg 30 days [58,61,62]Nutrients 2023, 15, 3266 19 of 41Table 1. Cont.Medicinal Plants Plants Parts Traditional Uses Recipients Pharmacological Effects Dose Administered Duration ofTreatment ReferencesCinnamomum verum J.Presl.Dried bark (innerpart)Diabetes, arthritis, diarrhea,hemorrhoids, toothache,cough, cold, menstrualirregularities, inflammation,bacterial infectionsT2DM patients↓ GI enzymes, ↑ insulinresponse and sensitivity, ↑glucose uptake, ↑ glycogensynthesis, ↓ gluconeogenesis,↓ AGE formation, ↑phosphorylation, ↑ GLUT41000 mg/day 84 days [67–69]Crocus sativus L. Flower stigmaDiabetes, hepatic andcognitive disorders,lumbago, asthma, cough,bronchitis, CVDs, cancer,hyperlipidemiaAlloxan-induceddiabetic rats↓ ROS, ↓ TG, ↓ TC, ↓ bloodglucose, ↓ insulin resistance, ↑insulin secretion andsensitivity, ↓ LDL, ↑ HDL, ↑serum insulin, ↓body weight,↓ lipid level25, 50, 100,200 mg/kg 60 days [75,76]Cuminum cyminum L. SeedsDiabetes, chronic diarrhea,dyspepsia, asthma,hypertension, inflammation,bronchitis, dizziness,eczema, gastrointestinaldisturbancesT2DM patients↓ Blood glucose, ↓glycosylated hemoglobin, ↓body weight, ↓ phospholipid,↓ cholesterol, ↓ free fatty acid,↓ TG, ↑ insulin secretion, ↓aldose reductase, ↓ α-amylaseand α-glucosidase activity, ↓AGEs50,100 mg/kg 56 days [83–86]Eugenia caryophyllataThunb.Unopened driedflower buds,stems, leaves, andfruitsNausea, hepatic, bowel andstomach disorders, vomiting,microbial and protozoalinfections, cholera, malaria,tuberculosisSTZ-induceddiabetic rats↓ PEPCK, ↓ G6Pase geneexpression, ↓ AChE, ↓α-glycosidase, ↓ α-amylase, ↓elevated blood sugar, ↓ lipidperoxidation100 mg/kg 105 days [88,90–92]Foeniculum vulgareMill. Seeds and fruitsDiabetes, lactation,menstruation irregularities,libido, tumor, inflammatorydisease, cancer, hepaticdisordersSTZ-induceddiabetic male rats↑ GSH, ↓ α- amylase and α-glucosidase activity, ↓breakdown of carbohydrates,↑ glycemic control, ↓cholesterol, ↓ TG, ↓ LDL, ↑HDL150 mg/kg 28 days [95,96,98]Nutrients 2023, 15, 3266 20 of 41Table 1. Cont.Medicinal Plants Plants Parts Traditional Uses Recipients Pharmacological Effects Dose Administered Duration ofTreatment ReferencesHordeum vulgare L. Grains, leaves,sproutsDiabetes, skin infections,arthritis, digestive diseases,weight loss, cancer,detoxification, lipidmetabolismSTZ-induceddiabetic rats↓ Blood glucose, ↓ cholesterol,↓ hepatic cholesterol synthesis,↓ α-glucosidase, ↓ α-amylase,↑ insulin secretion100, 250, 500 mg/kg 11 days [101–104]Juglans regia L.Husks, kernels,shells, seeds,flowers, barks,and leavesDiabetes, asthma, arthritis,eczema, stomachache,sinusitis, diarrhea,astringent, antisepticT2DM patients↓ Blood glucose, ↑ insulin, ↓HbA1c, ↑ GLUT2, ↓ glucoseintestinal absorption, ↓ FBG, ↓TG100 mg/kg 90 days [105–107]Lens culinaris L. Seeds and sproutsDiabetes, meat substitutes,obesity, inflammation,hyperlipidemiaSTZ-induceddiabetic mice↓ ROS, ↑ lipoproteinmetabolism improvement, ↑glycemic control, ↓ fastingblood glucose, ↓ serum bloodglucose, ↑ gut motility, ↓ bodyweight100, 200, 400 mg/kg 21 days [113–115,117]Nigella sativa L. SeedsDiabetes, digestive disorders,diarrhea, warts, toothaches,swellings, dyspnea, microbialinfections, fever,inflammation, hypertension,allergy, infertility, tumorsSTZ-induceddiabetic rats↑ Serum insulin, ↓ serumglucose, ↓ LDL, ↓ TG, ↓ totalcholesterol, ↑ proliferation ofβ-cells, ↓ oxidative stress300, 400 mg/kg 84 days [118–121]Olea europaea L. Fruit, pulp, leavesDiabetes, hypertension,inflammation, diarrhea,respiratory and urinary tractinfections, hemorrhoids,rheumatism, laxative,intestinal diseases, asthma,hyper uremia,hyperlipidemiaSTZ-induceddiabetic rats↓ α-glucosidase and digestiveenzymes activity, ↓postprandial hyperglycemia, ↑insulin action, ↑ functionalityand survival of β-cells1mL/100 bw/day(oil) 42 days[127–129,131,163]Nutrients 2023, 15, 3266 21 of 41Table 1. Cont.Medicinal Plants Plants Parts Traditional Uses Recipients Pharmacological Effects Dose Administered Duration ofTreatment ReferencesPinus gerardiana Wall.ex D. DonSeeds, leaves,barksDiabetes, hypertension,sepsis, fungal and microbialinfectionsSTZ-induceddiabetic rats↓ Body weight, ↓ oxidativestress, ↓ hyperglycemia, ↑expression of PPARγ gene, ↑Akt, ↑ insulin secretion, ↓malondialdehyde, ↓ fastingblood glucose levels3% and 6% w/w,(Powder) 42 days [133,135]Piper nigrum L. Seeds, leaves,flowers, and fruitsDiabetes, menstrualproblems, atrophic arthritis,digestive problems,influenza, bacterial infection,inflammation, fever,hypertension, cancer,depressants, diarrheaAlloxan-induceddiabetic rats↓ ROS generation, ↓ lipidperoxidation, ↓ lipogenesis, ↑insulin secretion, ↓ bloodglucose, ↓ triglyceride, ↓ totalcholesterol, ↑ HDL, ↓ LDL, ↑total antioxidant capacity50 mg/kg 56 days [137,141,143]Pistacia vera L. Seeds, leaves,fruitsDiabetes, coughs, stomachdiseases, asthma, sores, chestailments, rheumatism,trauma, gynecologicalailments, hemorrhoidsPre-diabetic patients↓ Fasting blood glucose, ↓insulinemia, ↓ Serum IL-6, ↓fructosamine, ↓ insulinresistance, ↓ LDL, ↓malondialdehyde, ↓proinflammatory cytokines, ↓glucose absorption57 g/day 28 days [145,146,149,164]Vitis vinifera L. Dried fruitsDiabetes, cancer, obesity,inflammation,hyperlipidemiaT2DM patients↓ LDL oxidation andLDL-cholesterol, ↓ bloodglucose control, ↓ postprandialglucose levels, ↓ HbA1c, ↓blood pressure36 g/day 168 days [152,154,155]Zingiber officinaleRoscoeRoots andrhizomesDiabetes, digestivedisorders, nausea,rheumatism, respiratorytract infection, cough,hypercholesterolemia,neurological diseases,asthma, stroke, constipation,cancerSTZ-induceddiabetic rats↓ Superoxide anion, ↓hydroxyl radicals, ↓α-glucosidase and α-amylaseactivity, ↓cholesterol, ↓ serumglucose, ↓ triglyceride, ↑ HDL,↑ insulin sensitivity400 mg/kg 56 days [158–160](↓) Decrease; (↑) Increase.Nutrients 2023, 15, 3266 22 of 41Table 2. Pharmacological effects of the active phytoconstituent/s of the selected antidiabetic plants.Medicinal Plants Parts Used PhytoconstituentStudied Diabetic Model Dose AdministeredDuration ofTreatmentPharmacological Effects ofthe Phytoconstituents Used ReferencesAlthaea officinalis L. Leaves, roots, seeds Lauric acidInsulin resistanceinduced inmacrophage THP-1cells5 µM–50 µM 1 dayIncreases glucose uptake inskeletal muscles and improvesmitochondrial dysfunction,insulin sensitivity, and GLUT-1and GLUT-3 expression[165]Anethum graveolens L. Leaves,seeds CarvoneSTZ-induced diabeticrats 25, 50, 100 mg/kg 30 daysAlleviates insulin resistance,improves insulin secretion,and reverses glycoproteinabnormalities[166]Allium sativum L. Fruits Allicin STZ-induceddiabetic rats 15, 30, 45 mg/kg 84 daysImproves insulin sensitivityand glucose tolerance,ameliorates diabetes-inducedmorphological alterations inthe kidney, and decreases FBGand triglyceride[167]Brassica oleracea L. Leaves Anthocyanin T2DM patients 160 mg/kg 168 daysImproves lipid metabolismand insulin resistance,decreases LDL, totalcholesterol, and postprandialglucose, and amelioratesdiabetic complications[168]Cicer arietinum L. Seeds Quercetin Alloxan-induceddiabetic rats 50 mg/kg 30 daysDecreases blood glucose, totalcholesterol, total bilirubin,creatinine, and oxidativestress, regulates glucosehomeostasis and improvesinsulin resistance[169]Cinnamomum verum J.Presl. Bark CinnamaldehydeSTZ-induceddiabetic rats 5, 10, 20 mg/kg 45 daysElevates HDL level, plasmainsulin, and hepatic glycogenand decreases serum glucose,total cholesterol, triglyceride,and LDL level[170]Nutrients 2023, 15, 3266 23 of 41Table 2. Cont.Medicinal Plants Parts Used PhytoconstituentStudied Diabetic Model Dose AdministeredDuration ofTreatmentPharmacological Effects ofthe Phytoconstituents Used ReferencesCrocus sativus L. Flower stigma Crocin T2DM patients 15 mg/kg 84 daysEnhances GLUT-4 expression,inhibits TNF-α, IL-6, alleviatesblood glucose, and improvesglucose homeostasis andinsulin resistance[171]Cuminum cyminum L. Seeds Cuminaldehyde andcuminolSTZ-induced diabeticrats 5, 10 mg/kg 45 daysIncreases insulin secretion andinsulin sensitivity, lowersblood glucose, provides β-cellprotection, and improves lipidprofile[172]Eugenia caryophyllataThunb.Flower buds, leaves,stem, fruits EugenolSTZ-induced diabeticmice100 mg/kg bw(I.P. route) 45 daysLowers blood glucose, bloodlipids, and AGEs formationand inhibits α-amylase andα-glucosidase enzymes[173]Foeniculum vulgareMill. Seeds KaempferolSTZ-induced diabeticmice 50 mg/kg 84 daysSuppresses gluconeogenesis,enhances glucose uptake inskeletal muscles, and restoreshexokinase activity[174]Hordeum vulgare L. Grains, leaves,sprouts β-glucanSTZ-induced diabeticrats 80 mg/kg 28 daysAlleviates diabeticcomplications, reducesoxidative stress, and lowersblood glucose, totalcholesterol, total triglyceride,and LDL level[175]Juglans regia L. Husks, kernels, seeds,flowers, bark, leaves β-caroteneSTZ-induced diabeticrats 10, 20 mg/kg 14 daysImproves glucose metabolismand lipid accumulation,lowers inflammatorycytokines, nitric oxideproduction, and oxidativestress, and enhances glucoseuptake in skeletal muscle[176]Nutrients 2023, 15, 3266 24 of 41Table 2. Cont.Medicinal Plants Parts Used PhytoconstituentStudied Diabetic Model Dose AdministeredDuration ofTreatmentPharmacological Effects ofthe Phytoconstituents Used ReferencesLens culinaris L. Seeds, sprouts Saponins STZ-induced diabeticrats 100, 200 mg/kg 14 daysAmeliorates postprandialhyperglycemia and diabeticcomplications and inhibitsα-glucosidase and aldosereductase enzymes[177]Nigella sativa L. seeds Thymoquinone STZ-induced diabeticrats 50 mg/kg 28 daysAttenuates blood glucose,lipid peroxidase, nitric oxideproduction, and oxidativestress and alleviates diabeticnephropathy[178]Olea europaea L. Fruits, leaves Lutein ARPE-19 cells 0.5–1 µM 24 hAmeliorates diabeticretinopathy andhyperglycemia, ImprovesSOD2, HO-1, Nrf2, GSH andcatalase regulation[179]Pinus gerardiana Wall.ex D. Don Nuts Linoleic acidPTPN1, PTPN9,PTPN11 cell lines 0.5–300 µM 7 daysInhibits the catalytic activity ofPTPN1, PTPN9, and PTPN11and improves glucose uptakeby activating AMPK and Aktpathway[180]Piper nigrum L. Seeds, flowers fruits,leaves β-caryophylleneSTZ-induced diabeticrats 200 mg/kg 42 daysDecreases glucose absorptionand increases glucose uptakein skeletal muscles,ameliorates glucose tolerance,pancreatic cell damage,oxidative stress, and lipid andblood glucose levels[181]Pistacia vera L. Fruits, nuts, leaves ProcyanidinsSTZ-induceddb/db type 2 diabeticmice250 mg/kg 45 daysEnhances GLUT-4translocation and glucoseuptake on skeletal muscles,possesses insulinotropic adanti-hyperglycaemic effects[182]Nutrients 2023, 15, 3266 25 of 41Table 2. Cont.Medicinal Plants Parts Used PhytoconstituentStudied Diabetic Model Dose AdministeredDuration ofTreatmentPharmacological Effects ofthe Phytoconstituents Used ReferencesVitis vinifera L. Fruits Ferulic acid STZ-induced diabeticrats 10 mg/kg 14 daysAlleviates body weight, andblood glucose, attenuatesdiabetes-associated symptoms,and lowers total triglyceride,total cholesterol, LDL andVLDL levels[183]Zingiber OfficinaleRoscoe Roots GingerolType 2 diabetic mice(Leprdb/db) 200 mg/kg 28 daysInduces insulin secretion,elevates plasma GLP-1,activates cAMP, PKA, andCREB in the pancreatic islets,and enhances GLUT-4translocation[184]Table 3. Chemical structures of the antidiabetic phytoconstituents of the selected medicinal plants.Medicinal Plant Antidiabetic Phytoconstituent Chemical StructureAlthaea officinalis L. Lauric acidNutrients 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW 26 of 43   Table 3. Chemical structures of the antidiabetic phytoconstituents of the selected medicinal plants. Medicinal Plant Antidiabetic Phytoconstituent Chemical Structure Althaea officinalis L. Lauric acid  Anethum graveolens L. Carvone  Allium sativum L. Allicin  Anethum graveolens L. CarvoneNutrients 023, 15, x FOR PEE  REVIEW 26 of 43   Table 3. Chemical structures of the antidiabetic phytoconstituents of t  l   . Medicinal Plant Antidiabetic Phytoconstituent ic l tr cture Althaea officinalis L. ric ci   Anethum graveolens L.   Allium sativum L. Allicin  Nutrients 2023, 15, 3266 26 of 41Table 3. Cont.Medicinal Plant Antidiabetic Phytoconstituent Chemical StructureAllium sativum L. AllicinNutrients 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW 26 of 43   Table 3. Chemical structures of the antidiabetic phytoconstituents of the selected medicinal plants. Medicinal Plant Antidiabetic Phytoconstituent Chemical Structure Althaea officinalis L. Lauric acid  Anethum graveolens L. Carvone  Allium sativum L. Allic n  Brassica oleracea L. AnthocyaninsNutrients 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW 27 of 43   Br ssica oleracea L. Anthocyanins  Cicer arietinum L. Quercetin  Cinnamomum verum J. Presl. Cinnamaldehyde . Cicer arietinum L. Quercetinutrients 2023, 15, x F  PEE  E IE  27 of 43   rassica oleracea . t ocya i s  icer arietinu  . erceti   inna o u  veru  J. resl. i a al e y e . Nutrients 2023, 15, 3266 27 of 41Table 3. Cont.Medicinal Plant Antidiabetic Phytoconstituent Chemical StructureCinnamomum verum J. Presl. CinnamaldehydeNutrients 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW 27 of 43   Brassica oleracea L. Anthocyanins  Cicer arietinum L. Quercetin  Cinnamomum verum J. Presl. Cinnamaldehyde . .Crocus sativus L. CrocinNutrients 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW 28 of 43   Crocus sativus L. Crocin  Cuminum cyminum L. Cuminaldehyde  Eugenia caryophyllata Thunb. Eugenol  Foeniculum vulgare Mill. Kaempferol  Cuminum cy inum L. Cuminaldehyde    Eugenia caryophyllata Thunb. Eugenoltrie ts , ,    I   f    r s s ti s . i   i  i  . i l   e i  r ll t  . l  e i l  l re ill. f l  Nutrients 2023, 15, 3266 28 of 41Table 3. Cont.Medicinal Plant Antidiabetic Phytoconstituent Chemical StructureFoeniculum vulgare Mill. KaempferolNutrients 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW 28 of 43   Crocus sativus L. Crocin  Cuminum cyminum L. Cuminaldehyde  Eugenia caryophyllata Thunb. Eugenol  Foeniculum vulgare Mill. Kaempferol  Hordeum vulgare L. β-glucanNutrients 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW 29 of 43   Hordeum vulgare L. β-glucan . Juglans regia L. β-carotene  .Nutrients 2023, 15, 3266 29 of 41Table 3. Cont.Medicinal Plant Antidiabetic Phytoconstituent Chemical StructureJuglans regia L. β-caroteneNutrients 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW 29 of 43   Hordeum vulgare L. β-glucan . Juglans regia L. β-carotene  Lens culinaris L. SaponinsNutrients 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW 30 of 43   Lens culinaris L. Saponins  Nigella sativa L. Thymoquinone  Olea europaea L. Lutein  Nigella sativa L. ThymoquinoneNutrients 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW 30 of 43   Lens culinaris L. Saponins  Nigella sativa L. Thymoquinone  Olea europaea L. Lutein  Nutrients 2023, 15, 3266 30 of 41Table 3. Cont.Medicinal Plant Antidiabetic Phytoconstituent Chemical StructureOlea europaea L. LuteinNutrients 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW 30 of 43   Lens culinaris L. Saponins  Nigella sativa L. Thymoquinone  Olea europaea L. Lutein  Pinus gerardiana Wall. ex D. Don Linoleic acidNutrients 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW 31 of 43   Pinus ger rdian  Wall. ex D. Don Linoleic acid  Piper nigrum L. β-caryophyllene . Pistacia vera L.  Procyanidins  Piper nigrum L. β-caryophyllenei  , ,          i  i a .  .     i  i  .  . i i   .    Nutrients 2023, 15, 3266 31 of 41Table 3. Cont.Medicinal Plant Antidiabetic Phytoconstituent Chemical StructurePistacia vera L. ProcyanidinsNutrients 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW 31 of 43   Pinus gerardiana Wall. ex D. Don Linoleic acid  Piper nigrum L. β-caryophyllene . Pistacia vera L.  Procyanidins  Vitis vinifera L. Ferulic acidNutrients 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW 32 of 43   Vitis vinifera L. Ferulic acid  Zingiber Officinale Roscoe Gingerol  Zingiber Officinale Roscoe Gingerolutrients 2023, 15, x F   I  32 of 43   itis vi ifera . er lic aci   i giber ffici ale sc e i er l  Nutrients 2023, 15, 3266 32 of 415. DiscussionDM is a disease primarily attributed to a deficiency in insulin production or ac-tion, with oxidative stress and inflammation being the main mediators of its progres-sion [16,17,185]. Several epidemiological studies have shown that dietary habits have asignificant impact on the prevention of diseases, with plant-derived constituents in vegeta-bles, fruits, spices, and condiments possessing beneficial health properties (e.g., antioxidant,immunomodulatory, anti-hyperlipidemic, anti-inflammatory, and anti-hyperglycemic ef-fects) [27,28]. In the typical Western diet, which comprises mostly processed foods, redmeat, and fast-acting carbohydrates, these phytoconstituents are lacking, and this has beendemonstrated to contribute to the development of DM [1,4]. Understanding the relevanceof dietary plant-based constituents to DM, including their pharmacological properties andmode of action, can be an effective strategy to better manage and prevent DM, potentiallyreducing the demand for medications and preventing diabetic complications [6,11].Vegetables (e.g., cabbage, lentils, onions), fruits (e.g., grapes), herbs (e.g., dill, thyme),spices (e.g., black pepper, cinnamon, garlic, ginger, cumin), and nuts (e.g., walnuts, pista-chios, pine nuts) contain a wide variety of phytochemicals (e.g., flavonoids, anthocyanins,saponins, tannins and carotenoids) that have been shown to possess antidiabetic properties.Olive oil and honey also provide natural chemicals that have demonstrated antidiabeticactivity. The aforementioned plant-derived foods exert their antidiabetic activity on multi-ple organs (e.g., liver, intestine, pancreas, skeletal muscle, adipose tissue) and via differentmechanistic pathways [28,141,156,168] (Figure 1).Previous studies have established the antidiabetic and antihyperlipidemic effects of adiverse range of phytochemicals in plant-based foods. This includes the organosulfur com-pound allicin from garlic, flavonoids (genistein, formononetin, biochanin A and quercetin)from chickpeas, cinnamaldehyde from cinnamon, isothiocyanates and anthocyanidinsfrom cabbage, carotenoids (crocetin, crocin) and safranal from saffron, thymoquinone fromblack cumin, organic acid (linolenic acid, oleic acid, arachidic acid and palmitic acid) inchilgoza nuts, procyanidins from pistachios, the sesquiterpene β-caryophyllene and thealkaloid piperine from black pepper, the stilbene resveratrol from grapes and curcuminoids,6-gingerol, and 6-shogaol from ginger.In animal models of DM, the consumption of these plant-based food products has beenshown to reduce oxidative stress-induced damage and increase insulin secretion as well asexhibit hypolipidemic, hypoglycemic, and anti-inflammatory activities. The consumptionof such products also helps to maintain a normal lipid profile, regulate blood glucose levels,inhibit ROS generation, decrease LDL, and increase HDL cholesterol level [74,80,124].Long-term consumption of plant-based diets may be deficient in essential nutrientssuch as protein, EPA, DHA, PUFA vitamin B12, vitamin D, iron, zinc, iodine, calcium, andbone turnover markers compared to non-vegetarian diets, which could cause potentialdeficiencies and health consequences. Furthermore, excessive fiber consumption may leadto mild digestive issues such as bloating, gas, and occasional bouts of diarrhea [186,187].However, most plant-based diets, such as Nigella sativa, have been found to be well toleratedand non-toxic, even at high doses [121]. Therefore, to compensate for these minor challengesmaintaining a balance is important.The vast array of bioactive compounds found in medicinal plants continues to be animportant resource for drug discovery and development, and structure–activity relationship(SAR) studies are important to understand how minor modifications in chemical structurescan modulate antidiabetic or antioxidant activity [188]. SAR analysis has demonstratedthat alkaloids found in medicinal plants such as Coptis chinensis, Commelina communis,Zingiber officinale, Nigella sativa, Cuminum cyminum, Anemarrhena asphodeloides, andPiper nigrum can improve postprandial hyperglycemia by inhibiting maltase-glucoamylase,which is becoming increasingly important as a target in antidiabetic drugdiscovery [84,121,137,156,189]. Such studies help researchers to design and develop com-pounds with improved activity and selectivity and also highlight the role of plant-basedfoods in the development of new drugs to control diabetes. However, further extensiveNutrients 2023, 15, 3266 33 of 41studies are warranted to better understand the mechanistic pathways through which plantsmay elicit their antidiabetic effects.Nutrients 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW 33 of 43   5. Discussion DM is a disease primarily attributed to a deficiency in insulin production or action, with oxidative stress and inflammation being the main mediators of its progression [16,17,185]. Several epidemiological studies have shown that dietary habits have a signif-icant impact on the prevention of diseases, with plant-derived constituents in vegetables, fruits, spices, and condiments possessing beneficial health properties (e.g., antioxidant, immunomodulatory, anti-hyperlipidemic, anti-inflammatory, and anti-hyperglycemic ef-fects) [27,28]. In the typical Western diet, which comprises mostly processed foods, red meat, and fast-acting carbohydrates, these phytoconstituents are lacking, and this has been demonstrated to contribute to the development of DM [1,4]. Understanding the rel-evance of dietary plant-based constituents to DM, including their pharmacological prop-erties and mode of action, can be an effective strategy to better manage and prevent DM, potentially reducing the demand for medications and preventing diabetic complications [6,11]. Vegetables (e.g., cabbage, lentils, onions), fruits (e.g., grapes), herbs (e.g., dill, thyme), spices (e.g., black pepper, cinnamon, garlic, ginger, cumin), and nuts (e.g., walnuts, pista-chios, pine nuts) contain a wide variety of phytochemicals (e.g., flavonoids, anthocyanins, saponins, tannins and carotenoids) that have been shown to possess antidiabetic proper-ties. Olive oil and honey also provide natural chemicals that have demonstrated antidia-betic activity. The aforementioned plant-derived foods exert their antidiabetic activity on multiple organs (e.g., liver, intestine, pancreas, skeletal muscle, adipose tissue) and via different mechanistic pathways [28,141,156,168] (Figure 1). . Figure 1. Antidiabetic effects of 20 medicinal plant-based foods on body weight and cells and organs (pancreas, blood vessels, intestine, liver, skeletal muscle, adipose tissue, and β-cells) associated with Fig re . ti i tic ff cts f ici l l t- ased foods o y ei t c lls r s(pancreas, blood vessels, intestine, liver, skeletal uscle, adipose tissue, and β-cells) associated withdiabetes. Medicinal plants decrease body weight and body fat by initiating lipolysis; decrease glucoseproduction by inhibiting gluconeogenesis and glycolysis in liver; decrease blood glucose levels bybinding to insulin receptor substrate (IRS-1); decrease blood lipid levels by inhibiting HMG-CoAreductase; promote glucose uptake and enhance GLUT-4 expression by activating the AMPK pathwayin skeletal muscles; inhibit α-glucosidase and α-amylase enzymes and decrease glucose absorption inthe small intestine; improve insulin sensitivity/secretion, improve β-cell function, and lower insulinresistance by activating PPAR-γ expression in the pancreas; decrease IL-6/TNF-α and enhanceglucose uptake by activating AMPK in adipose tissues; decrease ROS/free radicals/AGEs, oxidativestress, and inflammatory cytokines in β-cells via antioxidant/radical scavenging activity.6. ConclusionsMany of the medicinal plant-based foods protecting against diabetes mentioned in thisreview have been safely consumed since ancient times in various parts of the world. Thereis, however, a lack of sufficient scientific research on their protective effects in humans,particularly understanding the impact of high-dose and long-term consumption on health,and what happens when they are combined with conventional antidiabetic medications asthis may lead to unwanted side effects and interactions. Thus, it is important to practicecaution when consuming such plants in the context of managing DM. Future studiesshould focus on conducting high-quality clinical trials to validate the efficacy and establishthe therapeutic index of the phytochemicals that have already demonstrated promisingantidiabetic activity in vitro and in vivo. Such studies will provide a better understandingof the effectiveness, mechanisms of action, pharmacokinetic, and potential adverse effectsNutrients 2023, 15, 3266 34 of 41of active constituents from medicinal plant-based foods. This has the potential to lead tothe development of novel, safer, and more cost-effective plant-based medicines to tacklethe rising prevalence of diabetes, particularly in low- and middle-income countries.Author Contributions: Conceptualisation, P.A., V.S. and Y.H.A.A.-W.; formal Analysis, P.A., V.S. andJ.T.K.; funding acquisition, P.A. and Y.H.A.A.-W.; investigation, resources, writing, and editing, P.A.,V.S., J.T.K., J.F.S., M.R.R. and M.S.R.; Visualization, V.S., P.A., A.B.R. and Y.H.A.A.-W.; supervision andreviewing, P.A. and V.S. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.Funding: This research received no external funding.Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.Acknowledgments: We would like to express our gratitude to Peter R. Flatt, School of Biomed-ical Sciences, Ulster University, UK, for his assistance, direction, and support in developing thenarrative strategies.Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare that this paper does not include any conflict of interest.AbbreviationsAchE AcetylcholinesteraseAkt Serine/threonine kinaseAGEs Advanced glycated end productsBW Body weightcAMP Cyclic adenosine monophosphateCVDs Cardiovascular disordersCREB cAMP-response element proteinDHA Docosahexaenoic acidEPA Eicosapentaenoic acidFBG Fasting blood glucoseGSH GlutathioneGLUT2 Glucose transporter 2HbA1c Glycated hemoglobinHDL High-density lipoproteinLDL Low-density lipoproteinPEPCK Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinasePUFA Polyunsaturated fatty acidPKA Protein kinase AROS Reactive oxygen speciesSTZ StreptozotocinTC Total cholesterolTG TriglycerideVLDL Very low-density lipoproteinWWI World war IWWII World war IIReferences1. Rashidi, A.A.; Mirhashemi, S.M.; Taghizadeh, M.; Sarkhail, P. Iranian Medicinal Plants for Diabetes Mellitus: A SystematicReview. Pak. J. Biol. Sci. 2013, 16, 401–411. [CrossRef] [PubMed]2. Alam, S.; Sarker, M.M.R.; Sultana, T.N.; Chowdhury, M.N.R.; Rashid, M.A.; Chaity, N.I.; Zhao, C.; Xiao, J.; Hafez, E.E.;Khan, S.A.; et al. Antidiabetic Phytochemicals from Medicinal Plants: Prospective Candidates for New Drug Discovery andDevelopment. Front. Endocrinol. 2022, 13, 800714. [CrossRef] [PubMed]3. Sun, H.; Saeedi, P.; Karuranga, S.; Pinkepank, M.; Ogurtsova, K.; Duncan, B.B.; Stein, C.; Basit, A.; Chan, J.C.N.; Mbanya, J.C.; et al.IDF Diabetes Atlas: Global, Regional and Country-Level Diabetes Prevalence Estimates for 2021 and Projections for 2045. DiabetesRes. Clin. Pract. 2022, 183, 109119. [CrossRef] [PubMed]Nutrients 2023, 15, 3266 35 of 414. Zarshenas, M.M.; Khademian, S.; Moein, M. Diabetes and Related Remedies in Medieval Persian Medicine. Indian J. Endocrinol.Metab. 2014, 18, 142–149. [CrossRef] [PubMed]5. Kautzky-Willer, A.; Bancher-Todesca, D.; Pollak, A.; Repa, A.; Lechleitner, M.; Weitgasser, R. Gestational diabetes mellitus. WienKlin. Wochenschr. 2012, 124 (Suppl. S2), 58–65. [CrossRef] [PubMed]6. Cade, W.T. Diabetes-Related Microvascular and Macrovascular Diseases in the Physical Therapy Setting. Phys. Ther. 2008, 88,1322–1335. [CrossRef]7. Dowarah, J.; Singh, V.P. Anti-Diabetic Drugs Recent Approaches and Advancements. Bioorg. Med. Chem. 2020, 28, 115263.[CrossRef]8. Tran, L.; Zielinski, A.; Roach, A.H.; Jende, J.A.; Householder, A.M.; Cole, E.E.; Atway, S.A.; Amornyard, M.; Accursi, M.L.; Shieh,S.W.; et al. Pharmacologic Treatment of Type 2 Diabetes: Oral Medications. Ann. Pharmacother. 2015, 49, 540–556. [CrossRef]9. Hannan, J.M.A.; Nipa, N.; Toma, F.T.; Talukder, A.; Ansari, P. Acute Anti-Hyperglycaemic Activity of Five Traditional MedicinalPlants in High Fat Diet Induced Obese Rats. Front. Biosci. (Schol. Ed.) 2023, 15, 5. [CrossRef]10. Heydari, M.; Hashempur, M.H.; Daneshfard, B.; Mosavat, S.H. Chapter 4—Bioactive Foods as Dietary Intervention for Diabetesfrom the Perspective of Persian Medicine. In Bioactive Food as Dietary Interventions for Diabetes, 2nd ed.; Watson, R.R., Preedy, V.R.,Eds.; Academic Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2019; pp. 49–68. [CrossRef]11. Osadebe, P.; Odoh, U.; Uzor, P. Natural Products as Potential Sources of Antidiabetic Drugs. Br. J. Pharm. Res. 2014, 4, 2075–2095.[CrossRef]12. Coulter-Parkhill, A.; McClean, S.; Gault, V.A.; Irwin, N. Therapeutic Potential of Peptides Derived from Animal Venoms: CurrentViews and Emerging Drugs for Diabetes. Clin. Med. Insights Endocrinol. Diabetes 2021, 14, 11795514211006071. [CrossRef]13. Kolhe, S.S.; Rachh, P.R. Review on Potent Anti-diabetic Plants or Herbs from Traditional Medicine. J. Drug Deliv. Ther. 2018, 8,92–98. [CrossRef]14. Rizvi, S.I.; Mishra, N. Traditional Indian medicines used for the management of diabetes mellitus. J. Diabetes Res. 2013, 2013,712092. [CrossRef]15. Ansari, P.; Flatt, P.R.; Harriott, P.; Abdel-Wahab, Y.H.A. Evaluation of the Antidiabetic and Insulin Releasing Effects of A. squamosa,Including Isolation and Characterization of Active Phytochemicals. Plants 2020, 9, 1348. [CrossRef] [PubMed]16. Brennan, E.; McClelland, A.; Hagiwara, S.; Godson, C.; Kantharidis, P. Chapter 31—MiRNAs in the Pathophysiology of Diabetesand Their Value as Biomarkers. In Epigenetic Biomarkers and Diagnostics; García-Giménez, J.L., Ed.; Academic Press: Boston, MA,USA, 2016; pp. 643–661. [CrossRef]17. Lien, C.F.; Chen, S.J.; Tsai, M.C.; Lin, C.S. Potential Role of Protein Kinase C in the Pathophysiology of Diabetes-AssociatedAtherosclerosis. Front. Pharmacol. 2021, 12, 716332. [CrossRef]18. Koya, D.; King, G.L. Protein kinase C activation and the development of diabetic complications. Diabetes 1998, 47, 859–866.[CrossRef] [PubMed]19. Zaccardi, F.; Webb, D.R.; Yates, T.; Davies, M.J. Pathophysiology of type 1 and type 2 diabetes mellitus: A 90-year perspective.Postgrad. Med. J. 2016, 92, 63–69. [CrossRef]20. Ohiagu, F.O.; Chikezie, P.C.; Chikezie, C.M. Pathophysiology of diabetes mellitus complications: Metabolic events and control.Biomed. Res. Ther. 2021, 8, 3. [CrossRef]21. Singh, V.P.; Bali, A.; Singh, N.; Jaggi, A.S. Advanced glycation end products and diabetic complications. Korean J. Physiol.Pharmacol. Off. J. Korean Physiol. Soc. Korean Soc. Pharmacol. 2014, 18, 1–14. [CrossRef]22. Wolff, S.P.; Dean, R.T. Glucose autoxidation and protein modification. The potential role of ‘autoxidative glycosylation’ in diabetes.Biochem. J. 1987, 245, 243–250. [CrossRef]23. Chetyrkin, S.; Mathis, M.; Pedchenko, V.; Sanchez, O.A.; McDonald, W.H.; Hachey, D.L.; Madu, H.; Stec, D.; Hudson, B.; Voziyan,P. Glucose autoxidation induces functional damage to proteins via modification of critical arginine residues. Biochemistry 2011, 50,6102–6112. [CrossRef]24. Verma, S.; Chandra, H.; Banerjee, M. Cyclooxygenase 1 (COX1) expression in Type 2 diabetes mellitus: A preliminary study fromnorth India. Egypt. J. Med. Hum. Genet. 2016, 17, 41–45. [CrossRef]25. Banday, M.Z.; Sameer, A.S.; Nissar, S. Pathophysiology of diabetes: An overview. Avicenna J. Med. 2020, 10, 174–188. [CrossRef][PubMed]26. Ansari, P.; Flatt, P.R.; Harriott, P.; Abdel-Wahab, Y.H.A. Insulin Secretory and Antidiabetic Actions of Heritiera Fomes BarkTogether with Isolation of Active Phytomolecules. PLoS ONE 2022, 17, e0264632. [CrossRef] [PubMed]27. Petroni, M.L.; Brodosi, L.; Marchignoli, F.; Sasdelli, A.S.; Caraceni, P.; Marchesini, G.; Ravaioli, F. Nutrition in Patients with Type 2Diabetes: Present Knowledge and Remaining Challenges. Nutrients 2021, 13, 2748. [CrossRef]28. Ley, S.H.; Hamdy, O.; Mohan, V.; Hu, F.B. Prevention and management of type 2 diabetes: Dietary components and nutritionalstrategies. Lancet 2014, 383, 1999–2007. [CrossRef] [PubMed]29. Kianitalaei, A.; Feyzabadi, Z.; Hamedi, S.; Qaraaty, M. Althaea Officinalis in Traditional Medicine and modern phytotherapy. J.Adv. Pharm. Educ. Res. 2019, 9, 155.30. Bonaterra, G.A.; Schmitt, J.; Schneider, K.; Schwarzbach, H.; Aziz-Kalbhenn, H.; Kelber, O.; Müller, J.; Kinscherf, R. Phytohustil®and Root Extract of Althaea officinalis L. Exert Anti-Inflammatory and Anti-Oxidative Properties and Improve the MigratoryCapacity of Endothelial Cells in Vitro. Front. Pharmacol. 2022, 13, 948248. [CrossRef]Nutrients 2023, 15, 3266 36 of 4131. Basch, E.; Ulbricht, C.; Hammerness, P.; Vora, M. Marshmallow (Althaea officinalis L.) monograph. J. Herb. Pharmacother. 2003, 3,71–81.32. Kayarohanam, S. Current Trends of Plants Having Antidiabetic Activity: A Review. J. Bioanal. Biomed. 2015, 7, 55–65. [CrossRef]33. Khadr, S.; Ahmed, A. Antidiabetic Effect of Marshmallow and Psyllium Leaves in Alloxan Induced Diabetic Rats. J. Home Econ.Menofia Univ. 2016, 26, 225–244. [CrossRef]34. Husain, S.; Malik, R.; Javaid, M.; Bibi, S. Ethonobotanical properties and uses of Medicinal plants of Morgah Biodiversity Park,Rawalpindi. Pak. J. Bot. 2008, 40, 1897–1911.35. Yousaf, A.; Shahid, S. The study of Anethum graveolens L. (Dill) in the case of Diabetes mellitus (DM). Asian J. Res. Pharm. Sci.2020, 10, 248–256. [CrossRef]36. Mishra, N. Haematological and hypoglycemic potential Anethum graveolens seeds extract in normal and diabetic Swiss albinomice. Vet. World 2013, 6, 502. [CrossRef]37. Mansouri, M.; Nayebi, N.; Keshtkar, A.; Hasani-Ranjbar, S.; Taheri, E.; Larijani, B. The effect of 12 weeks Anethum graveolens (dill)on metabolic markers in patients with metabolic syndrome; a randomized double blind controlled trial. Daru J. Fac. Pharm. TehranUniv. Med. Sci. 2012, 20, 47. [CrossRef]38. Oshaghi, E.A.; Tavilani, H.; Khodadadi, I.; Gobdarzi, M.T. Dill tablet: A potential antioxidant and anti-diabetic medicine. AsianPac. J. Trop. Biomed. 2015, 5, 696–702.39. Goodarzi, M.T.; Khodadadi, I.; Tavilani, H.; Abbasi Oshaghi, E. The Role of Anethum graveolens L. (Dill) in the Management ofDiabetes. J. Trop. Med. 2016, 2016, 1098916. [CrossRef]40. Oshaghi, E.A.; Khodadadi, I.; Tavilani, H.; Goodarzi, M.T. Aqueous Extract of Anethum graveolens L. has Potential Antioxidantand Antiglycation Effects. Iran. J. Med. Sci. 2016, 41, 328–333.41. Kazemi, T.; Panahi Shahri, H.; Hossaini Farash, M.; Darabi, M.; Kashanian, M.; Akbari, H. Effect of Dill Pearl on Serum Lipids. J.Arak Univ. Med. Sci. 2006, 8, 35–41.42. Thomson, M.; Amin, Z.; Qattan, K.K.A.; Shaban, L. Anti-diabetic and hypolipidaemic properties of garlic (Allium sativum) instreptozotocin-induced diabetic rats. Semant. Sch. 2007, 15, 108–115.43. Hosseini, A.; Hosseinzadeh, H. A review on the effects of Allium sativum (Garlic) in metabolic syndrome. J. Endocrinol. Investig.2015, 38, 1147–1157. [CrossRef]44. Imo, C. Medicinal Properties of Ginger and Garlic: A Review. Curr. Trends Biomed. Eng. Biosci. 2019, 18, 47–52. [CrossRef]45. Londhe, V.; Gavasane, A.; Nipate, S.; Bandawane, D.; Chaudhari, P. Role of garlic (Allium sativum) in various diseases: Anoverview. J. Pharm. Res. Opin. 2011, 1, 129–134.46. Liu, C.T.; Sheen, L.Y.; Lii, C.K. Does garlic have a role as an antidiabetic agent? Mol. Nutr. Food Res. 2007, 51, 1353–1364. [CrossRef][PubMed]47. El-Saber Batiha, G.; Magdy Beshbishy, A.; Wasef, L.G.; Elewa, Y.H.A.; Al-Sagan, A.A.; Abd El-Hack, M.E.; Taha, A.E.; Abd-Elhakim, Y.M.; Prasad Devkota, H. Chemical Constituents and Pharmacological Activities of Garlic (Allium sativum L.): A Review.Nutrients 2020, 12, 872. [CrossRef]48. Corzo-Martínez, M.; Corzo, N.; Villamiel, M. Biological properties of onions and garlic. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 2007, 18, 609–625.[CrossRef]49. Eidi, A.; Eidi, M.; Esmaeili, E. Antidiabetic effect of garlic (Allium sativum L.) in normal and streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats.Phytomed. Int. J. Phytother. Phytopharm. 2006, 13, 624–629. [CrossRef] [PubMed]50. Singh, J.; Upadhyay, A.K.; Bahadur, A.; Singh, B.; Singh, K.P.; Rai, M. Antioxidant phytochemicals in cabbage (Brassica oleracea L.var. Capitata). Sci. Hortic. 2006, 108, 233. [CrossRef]51. Šamec, D.; Pavlović, I.; Salopek-Sondi, B. White cabbage (Brassica oleracea var. capitata f. alba): Botanical, phytochemical andpharmacological overview. Phytochem. Rev. 2017, 16, 117–135. [CrossRef]52. Jaiswal, A.K. Nutritional Composition and Antioxidant Properties of Fruits and Vegetables; Academic Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2020.53. Uuh-Narvaez, J.J.; Segura-Campos, M.R. Cabbage (Brassica oleracea var. capitata): A food with functional properties aimed to type2 diabetes prevention and management. J. Food Sci. 2021, 86, 4775–4789. [CrossRef]54. Al-Saeed, A.A.; Saif, M.; AlAmeer, M.A.; Al-Anazi, B.K. Hypoglycemic and Hypolipidemic Properties of Ethanolic Extract ofBrassica oleracea in Streptozotocin-Induced Diabetic Rats. Int. J. Pharm. Res. Allied Sci. 2020, 9, 151–157.55. Buko, V.; Zavodnik, I.; Kanuka, O.; Belonovskaya, E.; Naruta, E.; Lukivskaya, O.; Kirko, S.; Budryn, G.; Żyżelewicz, D.; Oracz, J.;et al. Antidiabetic effects and erythrocyte stabilization by red cabbage extract in streptozotocin-treated rats. Food Funct. 2018, 9,1850–1863. [CrossRef]56. Quintero-Soto, M.F.; Chávez-Ontiveros, J.; Garzón-Tiznado, J.A.; Salazar-Salas, N.Y.; Pineda-Hidalgo, K.V.; Delgado-Vargas, F.;López-Valenzuela, J.A. Characterization of peptides with antioxidant activity and antidiabetic potential obtained from chickpea(Cicer arietinum L.) protein hydrolyzates. J. Food Sci. 2021, 86, 2962–2977. [CrossRef] [PubMed]57. Acevedo Martinez, K.A.; Yang, M.M.; Gonzalez de Mejia, E. Technological properties of chickpea (Cicer arietinum): Production ofsnacks and health benefits related to type-2 diabetes. Compr. Rev. Food Sci. Food Saf. 2021, 20, 3762–3787. [CrossRef]58. Ramadhani, U.P.; Chandra, B.; Rivai, H. Overview of phytochemistry and pharmacology of chickpeas (Phaseolus vulgaris). World J.Pharm. Pharm. Sci. 2020, 9, 442–461.59. Roy, F.; Boye, J.I.; Simpson, B.K. Bioactive proteins and peptides in pulse crops: Pea, chickpea and lenti. Food Res. Int. 2010, 43,432–442. [CrossRef]Nutrients 2023, 15, 3266 37 of 4160. Wood, J.A.; Grusak, M.A. Nutritional value of chickpea. In Chickpea Breeding and Management; Yadav, S.S., Redden, B., Chen, W.,Sharma, B., Eds.; CAB International: Wallingford, UK, 2007; pp. 101–142. [CrossRef]61. Singh, K.; Gahlot, K. Pharmacognostical and Pharmacological Importance of Cicer arietinum Linn—A Review. Res. J. Pharm.Technol. 2018, 11, 4755–4763. [CrossRef]62. Sánchez-Magaña, L.M.; Cuevas-Rodríguez, E.O.; Gutiérrez-Dorado, R.; Ayala-Rodríguez, A.E.; Valdez-Ortiz, A.; Milán-Carrillo, J.;Reyes-Moreno, C. Solid-state bioconversion of chickpea (Cicer arietinum L.) by Rhizopus oligosporus to improve total phenoliccontent, antioxidant activity and hypoglycemic functionality. Int. J. Food Sci. Nutr. 2014, 65, 558–564. [CrossRef] [PubMed]63. Gupta, R.K.; Gupta, K.; Sharma, A.; Das, M.; Ansari, I.A.; Dwivedi, P.D. Health Risks and Benefits of Chickpea (Cicer arietinum)Consumption. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2017, 65, 6–22. [CrossRef]64. Wei, Y.; Li, P.; Li, B.; Gao, J.; Wang, D.; Qin, L.; Sun, W.; Xu, Y.; Shi, H.; Xu, T.; et al. Study of the Hypoglycemic Activity ofDerivatives of Isoflavones from Cicer arietinum L. Evid.-Based Complement. Altern. Med. Ecam 2017, 2017, 8746823. [CrossRef]65. Charles, D.J. Antioxidant Properties of Spices, Herbs and Other Sources; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2012.66. Rafehi, H.; Ververis, K.; Karagiannis, T.C. Controversies surrounding the clinical potential of cinnamon for the management ofdiabetes. Diabetes Obes. Metab. 2012, 14, 493–499. [CrossRef]67. Bandara, T.; Uluwaduge, I.; Jansz, E.R. Bioactivity of cinnamon with special emphasis on diabetes mellitus: A review. Int. J. FoodSci. Nutr. 2012, 63, 380–386. [CrossRef]68. Sharma, S.; Mandal, A.; Kant, R.; Jachak, S.; Jagzape, M. Is Cinnamon Efficacious for Glycaemic Control in Type-2 DiabetesMellitus? JPMA J. Pak. Med. Assoc. 2020, 70, 2065–2069.69. Sahib, A.S. Anti-diabetic and antioxidant effect of cinnamon in poorly controlled type-2 diabetic Iraqi patients: A randomized,placebo-controlled clinical trial. J. Intercult. Ethnopharmacol. 2016, 5, 108–113. [CrossRef]70. Hayward, N.J.; McDougall, G.J.; Farag, S.; Allwood, J.W.; Austin, C.; Campbell, F.; Horgan, G.; Ranawana, V. Cinnamon ShowsAntidiabetic Properties that Are Species-Specific: Effects on Enzyme Activity Inhibition and Starch Digestion. Plant Foods Hum.Nutr. 2019, 74, 544–552. [CrossRef] [PubMed]71. Kirkham, S.; Akilen, R.; Sharma, S.; Tsiami, A. The potential of cinnamon to reduce blood glucose levels in patients with type 2diabetes and insulin resistance. Diabetes Obes. Metab. 2009, 11, 1100–1113. [CrossRef]72. Elgazar, A.F.; Rezq, A.A.; Bukhari, H.M. Anti-Hyperglycemic Effect of Saffron Extract in Alloxan-Induced Diabetic Rats. J. Med.Plants 2013, 5, 14–22.73. Pandey, D.K.; Nandy, S.; Mukherjee, A.; Dey, A. Chapter 10—Advances in Bioactive Compounds from Crocus sativus (Saffron):Structure, Bioactivity and Biotechnology. In Studies in Natural Products Chemistry; Atta-ur-Rahman, Ed.; Bioactive NaturalProducts; Elsevier: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2020; Volume 66, pp. 273–304. [CrossRef]74. Hosseini, A.; Razavi, B.M.; Hosseinzadeh, H. Saffron (Crocus sativus) petal as a new pharmacological target: A review. Iran. J.Basic Med. Sci. 2018, 21, 1091–1099. [CrossRef] [PubMed]75. Farkhondeh, T.; Samarghandian, S. The effect of saffron (Crocus sativus L.) and its ingredients on the management of diabetesmellitus and dislipidemia. Afr. J. Pharm. Pharmacol. 2014, 8, 541–549. [CrossRef]76. Razavi, B.M.; Hosseinzadeh, H. Saffron: A promising natural medicine in the treatment of metabolic syndrome. J. Sci. Food Agric.2017, 97, 1679–1685. [CrossRef]77. Srivastava, R.; Ahmed, H.; Dixit, R.K.; Dharamveer; Saraf, S.A. Crocus sativus L.: A comprehensive review. Pharmacogn. Rev. 2010,4, 200–208. [CrossRef] [PubMed]78. Kadoglou, N.P.E.; Christodoulou, E.; Kostomitsopoulos, N.; Valsami, G. The cardiovascular-protective properties of saffron andits potential pharmaceutical applications: A critical appraisal of the literature. Phytother. Res. PTR 2021, 35, 6735–6753. [CrossRef][PubMed]79. Yaribeygi, H.; Zare, V.; Butler, A.E.; Barreto, G.E.; Sahebkar, A. Antidiabetic potential of saffron and its active constituents. J. Cell.Physiol. 2019, 234, 8610–8617. [CrossRef] [PubMed]80. Rahmani, A.; Khan, A.; Aldebasi, Y.; Aldebasi, Y. Saffron (Crocus sativus) and its Active Ingredients: Role in the Prevention andTreatment of Disease. Pharmacogn. J. 2017, 9, 873–879. [CrossRef]81. Srinivasan, K. Cumin (Cuminum cyminum) and black cumin (Nigella sativa) seeds: Traditional uses, chemical constituents, andnutraceutical effects. Food Qual. Saf. 2018, 2, 1–16. [CrossRef]82. Allaq, A.A.; Sidik, N.J.; Abdul-Aziz, A.; Ahmed, I.A. Cumin (Cuminum cyminum L.): A review of its ethnopharmacology,phytochemistry. Biomed. Res. Ther. 2020, 7, 9. [CrossRef]83. Mnif, S.; Aifa, S. Cumin (Cuminum cyminum L.) from traditional uses to potential biomedical applications. Chem. Biodivers. 2015,12, 733–742. [CrossRef]84. Siow, H.-L.; Gan, C.-Y. Functional protein from cumin seed (Cuminum cyminum): Optimization and characterization studies. FoodHydrocoll. 2014, 41, 178–187. [CrossRef]85. Singh, N.; Yadav, S.S.; Kumar, S.; Narashiman, B. A review on traditional uses, phytochemistry, pharmacology, and clinicalresearch of dietary spice Cuminum cyminum L. Phytother. Res. PTR 2021, 35, 5007–5030. [CrossRef]86. Ebada, M.E. Cuminaldehyde: A Potential Drug Candidate. J. Pharmacol. Clin. Res. 2017, 2, 555585. [CrossRef]87. Milind, P.; Deepa, K. Clove: A champion spice. Int. J. Res. Ayurveda Pharm. IJRAP 2011, 2, 47–54.88. Hussain, S.; Rahman, R.; Mushtaq, A.; Zerey-Belaskri, A.E. Clove: A review of a precious species with multiple uses. Int. J. Chem.Biochem. Sci. 2017, 11, 129–133.Nutrients 2023, 15, 3266 38 of 4189. Cortés-Rojas, D.F.; de Souza, C.R.; Oliveira, W.P. Clove (Syzygium aromaticum): A precious spice. Asian Pac. J. Trop. Biomed. 2014, 4,90–96. [CrossRef]90. Batiha, G.E.; Alkazmi, L.M.; Wasef, L.G.; Beshbishy, A.M.; Nadwa, E.H.; Rashwan, E.K. Syzygium aromaticum L. (Myrtaceae):Traditional Uses, Bioactive Chemical Constituents, Pharmacological and Toxicological Activities. Biomolecules 2020, 10, 202.[CrossRef] [PubMed]91. Bouchentouf, S.; Said, G.; Noureddine, M.; Allali, H.; Bouchentouf, A. A Note Study on Antidiabetic Effect of Main MoleculesContained in Clove Using Molecular Modeling Interactions with DPP-4 Enzyme. Int. J. Comput. Theor. Chem. 2017, 5, 9–13.[CrossRef]92. Chaieb, K.; Hajlaoui, H.; Zmantar, T.; Kahla-Nakbi, A.B.; Rouabhia, M.; Mahdouani, K.; Bakhrouf, A. The chemical compositionand biological activity of clove essential oil, Eugenia caryophyllata (Syzigium aromaticum L. Myrtaceae): A short review. Phytother.Res. PTR 2007, 21, 501–506. [CrossRef]93. Topal, F. Anticholinergic and antidiabetic effects of isoeugenol from clove (Eugenia caryophylata) oil. Int. J. Food Prop. 2019, 22,583–592. [CrossRef]94. Helal, E.G.E.; AL Jalaud, N.A.A.; El-Aleem, M.A.; Ahmed, S.S. Effect of Phytoestrogen (Fennel) on Some Sex Hormones andOther Physiological Parameters in Male Albino Rats. Egypt. J. Hosp. Med. 2019, 74, 1616–1620. [CrossRef]95. Abou, N.; Abou El-Soud, N.; El-Laithy, N.; El-Saeed, G.; Wahby, M.S.; Khalil, M.; Morsy, F.; Shaffie, N.; Abou, C.; Wahby, S.Antidiabetic Activities of Foeniculum vulgare Mill. Essential Oil in Streptozotocin-Induced Diabetic Rats. Maced. J. Med. Sci. 2011,4, 139–146.96. Samadi-Noshahr, Z.; Hadjzadeh, M.A.; Moradi-Marjaneh, R.; Khajavi-Rad, A. The hepatoprotective effects of fennel seeds extractand trans-Anethole in streptozotocin-induced liver injury in rats. Food Sci. Nutr. 2020, 9, 1121–1131. [CrossRef]97. Badgujar, S.B.; Patel, V.V.; Bandivdekar, A.H. Foeniculum vulgare Mill: A review of its botany, phytochemistry, pharmacology,contemporary application, and toxicology. BioMed Res. Int. 2014, 2014, 842674. [CrossRef]98. Osman, N.N.; Jambi, E.J.; Aseri, N.H. Assessment of antidiabetic and antioxidant activities of Cassia angustifolia and Feoniculumvulgare in diabetic rats. Int. J. Pharm. Res. Allied Sci. 2017, 6, 149–162.99. Zeng, Y.; Pu, X.; Yang, J.; Du, J.; Yang, X.; Li, X.; Li, L.; Zhou, Y.; Yang, T. Preventive and Therapeutic Role of Functional Ingredientsof Barley Grass for Chronic Diseases in Human Beings. Oxidative Med. Cell. Longev. 2018, 2018, 3232080. [CrossRef]100. Lee, Y.H.; Kim, J.H.; Kim, S.H.; Oh, J.Y.; Seo, W.D.; Kim, K.M.; Jung, J.C.; Jung, Y.S. Barley Sprouts Extract Attenuates AlcoholicFatty Liver Injury in Mice by Reducing Inflammatory Response. Nutrients 2016, 8, 440. [CrossRef] [PubMed]101. Minaiyan, M.; Ghannadi, A.; Movahedian, A.; Hakim-Elahi, I. Effect of Hordeum vulgare L. (Barley) on blood glucose levels ofnormal and STZ-induced diabetic rats. Res. Pharm. Sci. 2014, 9, 173–178.102. Rashid, K.; Kumar, C.S.; Haleel, P.M.M. Healthcare Benefits of Hordeum vulgare L (Barley): A Phyto-Pharmacological Review. Res.J. Pharmacol. Pharmacodyn. 2017, 9, 207–210. [CrossRef]103. Boantă, A.; Muntean, L.; Russu, F.; Ona, A.; Porumb, I.; Filip, E. Barley (Hordeum vulgare L.): Medicinal and TherapeuticUses—Review. Hop Med. Plants 2019, 27, 87–95.104. Obadi, M.; Sun, J.; Xu, B. Highland barley: Chemical composition, bioactive compounds, health effects, and applications. FoodRes. Int. 2021, 140, 110065. [CrossRef]105. Delaviz, H.; Mohammadi, J.; Ghalamfarsa, G.; Mohammadi, B.; Farhadi, N. A Review Study on Phytochemistry and PharmacologyApplications of Juglans regia Plant. Pharmacogn. Rev. 2017, 11, 145–152. [CrossRef] [PubMed]106. Liu, R.; Su, C.; Xu, Y.; Shang, K.; Sun, K.; Li, C.; Lu, J. Identifying potential active components of walnut leaf that action diabetesmellitus through integration of UHPLC-Q-Orbitrap HRMS and network pharmacology analysis. J. Ethnopharmacol. 2020, 253,112659. [CrossRef] [PubMed]107. Forino, M.; Stiuso, P.; Lama, S.; Ciminiello, P.; Tenore, G.C.; Novellino, E.; Taglialatela-Scafati, O. Bioassay-guided identification ofthe antihyperglycaemic constituents of walnut (Juglans regia) leaves. J. Funct. Foods 2016, 26, 731–738. [CrossRef]108. Kamyab, H.; Hejrati, S.; Khanavi, M.; Malihi, F.; Mohammadirad, A.; Baeeri, M.; Esmaily, H.; Abdollahi, M. Hepatic mechanismsof the Walnut antidiabetic effect in mice. Open Life Sci. 2010, 5, 304–309. [CrossRef]109. Asgary, S.; Parkhideh, S.; Solhpour, A.; Madani, H.; Mahzouni, P.; Rahimi, P. Effect of ethanolic extract of Juglans regia L. on bloodsugar in diabetes-induced rats. J. Med. Food 2008, 11, 533–538. [CrossRef]110. Magro, A.E.A.; Silva, L.C.; Rasera, G.B.; Ferreira, L.R.; Faria, J.A.F.; Teixeira, J.A. Solid-state fermentation as an efficient strategyfor the biotransformation of lentils: Enhancing their antioxidant and antidiabetic potentials. Bioresour. Bioprocess. 2019, 6, 38.[CrossRef]111. Singhal, P.; Kaushik, G.; Mathur, P. Antidiabetic potential of commonly consumed legumes: A review. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr.2014, 54, 655–672. [CrossRef]112. Świeca, M.; Baraniak, B.; Gawlik-Dziki, U. In vitro digestibility and starch content, predicted glycemic index and potential in vitroantidiabetic effect of lentil sprouts obtained by different germination techniques. Food Chem. 2013, 138, 1414–1420. [CrossRef]113. Ganesan, K.; Xu, B. Polyphenol-Rich Lentils and Their Health Promoting Effects. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2017, 18, 2390. [CrossRef]114. Tefera, M.M.; Altaye, B.M.; Yimer, E.M.; Berhe, D.F.; Tadesse Bekele, S. Antidiabetic Effect of Germinated Lens culinaris MedikSeed Extract in Streptozotocin-Induced Diabetic Mice. J. Exp. Pharmacol. 2020, 12, 39–45. [CrossRef]115. Casarin, A.L.F.; Rasera, G.B.; de Castro, R.J.S. Combined biotransformation processes affect the antioxidant, antidiabetic andprotease inhibitory properties of lentils. Process Biochem. 2021, 102, 250–260. [CrossRef]Nutrients 2023, 15, 3266 39 of 41116. Faris, M.A.-I.E.; Takruri, H.R.; Issa, A.Y. Role of lentils (Lens culinaris L.) in human health and nutrition: A review. Mediterr. J.Nutr. Metab. 2013, 6, 3–16. [CrossRef]117. Chen, K.; Gao, C.; Han, X.; Li, D.; Wang, H.; Lu, F. Co-fermentation of lentils using lactic acid bacteria and Bacillus subtilis nattoincreases functional and antioxidant components. J. Food Sci. 2021, 86, 475–483. [CrossRef]118. Rchid, H.; Chevassus, H.; Nmila, R.; Guiral, C.; Petit, P.; Chokaïri, M.; Sauvaire, Y. Nigella sativa seed extracts enhanceglucose-induced insulin release from rat-isolated Langerhans islets. Fundam. Clin. Pharmacol. 2004, 18, 525–529. [CrossRef]119. Benhaddou-Andaloussi, A.; Martineau, L.C.; Spoor, D.; Vuong, T.; Leduc, C.; Joly, E.; Burt, A.; Meddah, B.; Settaf, A.;Arnason, J.T.; et al. Antidiabetic Activity of Nigella sativa Seed Extract in Cultured Pancreatic β-cells, Skeletal Muscle Cells,and Adipocytes. Pharm. Biol. 2008, 46, 96–104. [CrossRef]120. Yarnell, E.; Abascal, K. Nigella sativa: Holy Herb of the Middle East. Altern. Complement. Ther. 2011, 17, 99–105. [CrossRef]121. Mathur, M.L.; Gaur, J.; Sharma, R.; Haldiya, K.R. Antidiabetic Properties of a Spice Plant Nigella sativa. J. Endocrinol. Metab. 2011,1, 1–8. [CrossRef]122. Ramadan, M.F. Nutritional value, functional properties and nutraceutical applications of black cumin (Nigella sativa L.): Anoverview. Int. J. Food Sci. Technol. 2007, 42, 1208–1218. [CrossRef]123. Akhtar, M.T.; Qadir, R.; Bukhari, I.; Ashraf, R.A.; Malik, Z.; Zahoor, S.; Murtaza, M.A.; Siddique, F.; Shah, S.N.H.; Saadia, M.Antidiabetic potential of Nigella sativa L. seed oil in alloxan induced diabetic rabbits. Trop. J. Pharm. Res. 2020, 19, 283–289.[CrossRef]124. Hashmi, M.A.; Khan, A.; Hanif, M.; Farooq, U.; Perveen, S. Traditional Uses, Phytochemistry, and Pharmacology of Olea europaea(Olive). Evid. Based Complement. Altern. Med. Ecam 2015, 2015, 541591. [CrossRef]125. Caramia, G. Virgin olive oil. From legend to scientific knowledge of the nutraceutical aspects. Pediatr. Med. Chir. 2006, 28, 9–23.126. Acar-Tek, N.; Ağagündüz, D. Olive Leaf (Olea europaea L. folium): Potential Effects on Glycemia and Lipidemia. Ann. Nutr. Metab.2020, 76, 10–15. [CrossRef]127. Waterman, E.; Lockwood, B. Active components and clinical applications of olive oil. Altern. Med. Rev. A J. Clin. Ther. 2007, 12,331–342.128. Figueiredo-González, M.; Reboredo-Rodríguez, P.; González-Barreiro, C.; Simal-Gándara, J.; Valentão, P.; Carrasco-Pancorbo, A.;Andrade, P.B.; Cancho-Grande, B. Evaluation of the neuroprotective and antidiabetic potential of phenol-rich extracts from virginolive oils by in vitro assays. Food Res. Int. 2018, 106, 558–567. [CrossRef]129. Collado-González, J.; Grosso, C.; Valentão, P.; Andrade, P.B.; Ferreres, F.; Durand, T.; Guy, A.; Galano, J.M.; Torrecillas, A.;Gil-Izquierdo, Á. Inhibition of α-glucosidase and α-amylase by Spanish extra virgin olive oils: The involvement of bioactivecompounds other than oleuropein and hydroxytyrosol. Food Chem. 2017, 235, 298–307. [CrossRef]130. Santos-Lozano, J.M.; Rada, M.; Lapetra, J.; Guinda, Á.; Jiménez-Rodríguez, M.C.; Cayuela, J.A.; Ángel-Lugo, A.;Vilches-Arenas, Á.; Gómez-Martín, A.M.; Ortega-Calvo, M.; et al. Prevention of type 2 diabetes in prediabetic patientsby using functional olive oil enriched in oleanolic acid: The PREDIABOLE study, a randomized controlled trial. Diabetes Obes.Metab. 2019, 21, 2526–2534. [CrossRef]131. Visioli, F.; Davalos, A.; López de Las Hazas, M.C.; Crespo, M.C.; Tomé-Carneiro, J. An overview of the pharmacology of olive oiland its active ingredients. Br. J. Pharmacol. 2020, 177, 1316–1330. [CrossRef]132. Alami, K.; Mousavi, S.Y. Afghan Chehelghoza (Pinus gerardiana L.) pine nut diet enhances the learning and memory in male rats.Nutr. Diet. Suppl. 2020, 12, 277–288. [CrossRef]133. Singh, G.; Kumar, D.; Dash, A.K. Pinus gerardiana Wallichex. D. Don.—A review. Phytomed. Plus 2021, 1, 100024. [CrossRef]134. Bhardwaj, K.; Sharma, R.; Cruz-Martins, N.; Valko, M.; Upadhyay, N.K.; Kuča, K.; Bhardwaj, P. Studies of Phytochemicals,Antioxidant, and Antibacterial Activities of Pinus gerardiana and Pinus roxburghii Seed Extracts. BioMed Res. Int. 2022, 2022,e5938610. [CrossRef]135. Hosseini, S.A.; Vali, M.; Haghighi-Zade, M.H.; Siahpoosh, A.; Malihi, R. The Effect of Chilgoza Pine Nut (Pinus gerardiana Wall.)on Blood Glucose and Oxidative Stress in Diabetic Rats. Diabetes Metab. Syndr. Obes. Targets Ther. 2020, 13, 2399–2408. [CrossRef]136. Zulfqar, F.; Akhtar, M.F.; Saleem, A.; Akhtar, B.; Sharif, A.; Saleem, U. Chemical characterization, antioxidant evaluation, andantidiabetic potential of Pinus gerardiana (Pine nuts) extracts. J. Food Biochem. 2020, 44, e13199. [CrossRef]137. Takooree, H.; Aumeeruddy, M.Z.; Rengasamy, K.R.R.; Venugopala, K.N.; Jeewon, R.; Zengin, G.; Mahomoodally, M.F. A systematicreview on black pepper (Piper nigrum L.): From folk uses to pharmacological applications. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 2019, 59(Suppl. S1), S210–S243. [CrossRef] [PubMed]138. Parthasarathy, V.A.; Chempakam, B.; Zachariah, T.J. Chemistry of Spices; CABI Pub.: Wallingford, UK, 2008.139. Peter, K.V. Handbook of Herbs and Spices; Woodhead publishing: Sawston, UK, 2006; Volume 3.140. Abukawsar, M.; Saleh-E-In, M.; Ahsan, M.; Rahim, M.; Nurul, M.; Huda Bhuiyan, M.N.; Sudhangshu, R.K.; Ghosh, A.; Naher, S.Chemical, pharmacological and nutritional quality assessment of black pepper (Piper nigrum L.) seed cultivars. J. Food Biochem.2018, 42, e12590. [CrossRef]141. Ashokkumar, K.; Murugan, M.; Dhanya, M.K.; Pandian, A.; Warkentin, T.D. Phytochemistry and therapeutic potential of blackpepper [Piper nigrum (L.)] essential oil and piperine: A review. Clin. Phytosci. 2021, 7, 52. [CrossRef]142. Jeena, K.; Liju, V.B.; Umadevi, N.P.; Kuttan, R. Antioxidant, anti-inflammatory and antinociceptive properties of black pepperessential oil (Piper nigrum Linn). J. Essent. Oil Bear. Plants 2014, 17, 1–12. [CrossRef]Nutrients 2023, 15, 3266 40 of 41143. Sarfraz, M.; Khaliq, T.; Hafizur, R.M.; Raza, S.A.; Ullah, H. Effect of black pepper, turmeric and ajwa date on the endocrinepancreas of the experimentally induced diabetes in wister albino rats: A histological and immunohistochemical study. Endocr.Metab. Sci. 2021, 4, 100098. [CrossRef]144. Shityakov, S.; Bigdelian, E.; Hussein, A.A.; Hussain, M.B.; Tripathi, Y.C.; Khan, M.U.; Shariati, M.A. Phytochemical andpharmacological attributes of piperine: A bioactive ingredient of black pepper. Eur. J. Med. Chem. 2019, 176, 149–161. [CrossRef]145. Rahman, M.M.; Islam, M.R.; Akash, S.; Harun-Or-Rashid, M.; Ray, T.K.; Rahaman, M.S.; Wilairatana, P. Recent advancementsof nanoparticles application in cancer and neurodegenerative disorders: At a glance. Biomed. Pharmacother. 2022, 153, 113305.[CrossRef]146. Napoli, E.; Gentile, D.; Ruberto, G. GC–MS analysis of terpenes from Sicilian Pistacia vera L. oleoresin. A source of biologicallyactive compounds. Biomed. Chromatogr. 2019, 33, e4381. [CrossRef]147. Emlik, H.; Simitcioglu, B.; Cakir, A.; Kilic, I.H.; Karagoz, I.D. Evaluation of Pistacia vera Sap Waste Sections and Its Potential Roleon Treatment. Eurasia Proc. Sci. Technol. Eng. Math. 2020, 10, 12–16.148. Ozçelik, B.; Aslan, M.; Orhan, I.; Karaoglu, T. Antibacterial, antifungal, and antiviral activities of the lipophylic extracts of Pistaciavera. Microbiol. Res. 2005, 160, 159–164. [CrossRef]149. Gok, H.N.; Pekacar, S.; Deliorman Orhan, D. Investigation of Enzyme Inhibitory Activities, Antioxidant Activities, and ChemicalProperties of Pistacia vera Leaves Using LC-QTOF-MS and RP-HPLC. Iran. J. Pharm. Res. IJPR 2022, 21, e127033. [CrossRef][PubMed]150. Noguera-Artiaga, L.; Pérez-López, D.; Burgos-Hernández, A.; Wojdyło, A.; Carbonell-Barrachina, Á.A. Phenolic and triterpenoidcomposition and inhibition of α-amylase of pistachio kernels (Pistacia vera L.) as affected by rootstock and irrigation treatment.Food Chem. 2018, 261, 240–245. [CrossRef] [PubMed]151. Rivero-Cruz, J.F.; Zhu, M.; Kinghorn, A.D.; Wu, C.D. Antimicrobial constituents of Thompson seedless raisins (Vitis vinifera)against selected oral pathogens. Phytochem. Lett. 2008, 1, 151–154. [CrossRef]152. Olmo-Cunillera, A.; Escobar-Avello, D.; Pérez, A.J.; Marhuenda-Muñoz, M.; Lamuela-Raventós, R.M.; Vallverdú-Queralt, A. IsEating Raisins Healthy? Nutrients 2020, 12, 54. [CrossRef]153. Kandylis, P. Grapes and Their Derivatives in Functional Foods. Foods 2021, 10, 672. [CrossRef]154. Kanellos, P.T.; Kaliora, A.C.; Tentolouris, N.K.; Argiana, V.; Perrea, D.; Kalogeropoulos, N.; Kountouri, A.M.; Karathanos, V.T. Apilot, randomized controlled trial to examine the health outcomes of raisin consumption in patients with diabetes. Nutrition 2014,30, 358–364. [CrossRef] [PubMed]155. Liu, J.; Wang, Y.; Liu, R.H.; He, X. Novel triterpenoids isolated from raisins exert potent antiproliferative activities by targetingmitochondrial and Ras/Raf/ERK signaling in human breast cancer cells. Food Funct. 2016, 7, 3244–3251. [CrossRef]156. Aderonke Otunola, G.; Jide Afolayan, A. A Review of the Antidiabetic Activities of Ginger; IntechOpen: Rijeka, Croatia, 2020.[CrossRef]157. Anh, N.H.; Kim, S.J.; Long, N.P.; Min, J.E.; Yoon, Y.C.; Lee, E.G.; Kim, M.; Kim, T.J.; Yang, Y.Y.; Son, E.Y.; et al. Ginger on HumanHealth: A Comprehensive Systematic Review of 109 Randomized Controlled Trials. Nutrients 2020, 12, 157. [CrossRef]158. Račková, L.; Cupáková, M.; Tažký, A.; Mičová, J.; Kolek, E.; Košt’álová, D. Redox properties of ginger extracts: Perspectives ofuse of Zingiber officinale Rosc. as antidiabetic agent. Interdiscip. Toxicol. 2013, 6, 26–33. [CrossRef]159. Al-Amin, Z.; Thomson, M.; Al-Qattan, K.; Peltonen-Shalaby, R.; Ali, M. Anti-diabetic and hypolipidemic properties of ginger(Zingiber officinale) in streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats. Br. J. Nutr. 2006, 96, 660–666. [CrossRef]160. Shanmugam, K.R.; Mallikarjuna, K.; Nishanth, K.; Ku, C.H.; Reddy, K.S. Protective effect of dietary ginger on antioxidant enzymesand oxidative damage in experimental diabetic rat tissues. Food Chem. 2011, 124, 1436–1442. [CrossRef]161. Morakinyo, A.O.; Akindele, A.J.; Ahmed, Z. Modulation of antioxidant enzymes and inflammatory cytokines: Possible mechanismof anti-diabetic effect of ginger extracts. Afr. J. Biomed. Res. 2011, 14, 195–202.162. Adefegha, A.O.A.S.A.; Oboh, G.; Akinyemi, A.J.; Ademiluyi, A. Inhibitory effects of aqueous extract of two varieties of ginger onsome key enzymes linked to type-2 diabetes in vitro. J. Food Nutr. Res. 2010, 49, 14–20.163. Balamash, K.S.; Alkreathy, H.M.; Al Gahdali, E.H.; Khoja, S.O.; Ahmad, A. Comparative Biochemical and HistopathologicalStudies on the Efficacy of Metformin and Virgin Olive Oil against Streptozotocin-Induced Diabetes in Sprague-Dawley Rats. J.Diabetes Res. 2018, 2018, 4692197. [CrossRef] [PubMed]164. Mandalari, G.; Barreca, D.; Gervasi, T.; Roussell, M.A.; Klein, B.; Feeney, M.J.; Carughi, A. Pistachio Nuts (Pistacia vera L.):Production, Nutrients, Bioactives and Novel Health Effects. Plants 2021, 11, 18. [CrossRef] [PubMed]165. Tham, Y.Y.; Choo, Q.C.; Muhammad, T.S.T.; Chew, C.H. Lauric acid alleviates insulin resistance by improving mitochondrialbiogenesis in THP-1 macrophages. Mol. Biol. Rep. 2020, 47, 9595–9607. [CrossRef]166. Muruganathan, U.; Srinivasan, S.; Indumathi, D. Antihyperglycemic Effect of Carvone: Effect on the Levels of GlycoproteinComponents in Streptozotocin-Induced Diabetic Rats. J. Acute Dis. 2013, 2, 310–315. [CrossRef]167. Abdulghafoor, H.A.; Ramadhan, S.J.; Nawfal, A.J. Therapeutic Effects of Allicin against the Diabetes Mellitus Induced byStreptozotocin in Male Rats. NVEO Nat. Volatiles Essent. Oils J. NVEO 2021, 8, 8934–8945.168. Li, D.; Zhang, Y.; Liu, Y.; Sun, R.; Xia, M. Purified anthocyanin supplementation reduces dyslipidemia, enhances antioxidantcapacity, and prevents insulin resistance in diabetic patients. J. Nutr. 2015, 145, 742–748. [CrossRef]Nutrients 2023, 15, 3266 41 of 41169. Ansari, P.; Choudhury, S.T.; Seidel, V.; Rahman, A.B.; Aziz, M.A.; Richi, A.E.; Rahman, A.; Jafrin, U.H.; Hannan, J.M.A.;Abdel-Wahab, Y.H.A. Therapeutic Potential of Quercetin in the Management of Type-2 Diabetes Mellitus. Life 2022, 12, 1146.[CrossRef]170. Subash Babu, P.; Prabuseenivasan, S.; Ignacimuthu, S. Cinnamaldehyde—A potential antidiabetic agent. Phytomed. Int. J.Phytother. Phytopharm. 2007, 14, 15–22. [CrossRef]171. Behrouz, V.; Dastkhosh, A.; Hedayati, M.; Sedaghat, M.; Sharafkhah, M.; Sohrab, G. The effect of crocin supplementation onglycemic control, insulin resistance and active AMPK levels in patients with type 2 diabetes: A pilot study. Diabetol. Metab. Syndr.2020, 12, 59. [CrossRef] [PubMed]172. Patil, S.B.; Takalikar, S.S.; Joglekar, M.M.; Haldavnekar, V.S.; Arvindekar, A.U. Insulinotropic and β-cell protective action ofcuminaldehyde, cuminol and an inhibitor isolated from Cuminum cyminum in streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats. Br. J. Nutr.2013, 110, 1434–1443. [CrossRef] [PubMed]173. Singh, P.; Jayaramaiah, R.H.; Agawane, S.B.; Vannuruswamy, G.; Korwar, A.M.; Anand, A.; Dhaygude, V.S.; Shaikh, M.L.; Joshi,R.S.; Boppana, R.; et al. Potential Dual Role of Eugenol in Inhibiting Advanced Glycation End Products in Diabetes: Proteomicand Mechanistic Insights. Sci. Rep. 2016, 6, 18798. [CrossRef]174. Alkhalidy, H.; Moore, W.; Wang, Y.; Luo, J.; McMillan, R.P.; Zhen, W.; Zhou, K.; Liu, D. The Flavonoid Kaempferol AmelioratesStreptozotocin-Induced Diabetes by Suppressing Hepatic Glucose Production. Molecules 2018, 23, 2338. [CrossRef] [PubMed]175. Mirjana, M.; Jelena, A.; Aleksandra, U.; Svetlana, D.; Nevena, G.; Jelena, M.; Ibrahim, M.; Ana, Š.D.; Goran, P.; Melita, V. β-Glucanadministration to diabetic rats reestablishes redox balance and stimulates cellular pro-survival mechanisms. J. Funct. Foods 2013,5, 267–278. [CrossRef]176. Nimbalkar, V.; Joshi, U.; Shinde, S.; Pawar, G. In-vivo and in-vitro evaluation of therapeutic potential of β- Carotene in diabetes. J.Diabetes Metab. Disord. 2021, 20, 1621–1630. [CrossRef] [PubMed]177. Ezzat, S.M.; Abdel Motaal, A.; El Awdan, S.A.W. In vitro and in vivo antidiabetic potential of extracts and a furostanol saponinfrom Balanites aegyptiaca. Pharm. Biol. 2017, 55, 1931–1936. [CrossRef]178. Faisal Lutfi, M.; Abdel-Moneim, A.H.; Alsharidah, A.S.; Mobark, M.A.; Abdellatif, A.A.H.; Saleem, I.Y.; Al Rugaie, O.; Mohany,K.M.; Alsharidah, M. Thymoquinone Lowers Blood Glucose and Reduces Oxidative Stress in a Rat Model of Diabetes. Molecules2021, 26, 2348. [CrossRef]179. Shivarudrappa, A.H.; Ponesakki, G. Lutein reverses hyperglycemia-mediated blockage of Nrf2 translocation by modulating theactivation of intracellular protein kinases in retinal pigment epithelial (ARPE-19) cells. J. Cell Commun. Signal. 2020, 14, 207–221.[CrossRef]180. Yoon, S.-Y.; Ahn, D.; Hwang, J.Y.; Kang, M.J.; Chung, S.J. Linoleic acid exerts antidiabetic effects by inhibiting protein tyrosinephosphatases associated with insulin resistance. J. Funct. Foods 2021, 83, 104532. [CrossRef]181. Kumawat, V.S.; Kaur, G. Insulinotropic and antidiabetic effects of β-caryophyllene with l-arginine in type 2 diabetic rats. J. FoodBiochem. 2020, 44, e13156. [CrossRef]182. Pinent, M.; Blay, M.; Bladé, M.C.; Salvadó, M.J.; Arola, L.; Ardévol, A. Grape seed-derived procyanidins have an antihyperglycemiceffect in streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats and insulinomimetic activity in insulin-sensitive cell lines. Endocrinology 2004, 145,4985–4990. [CrossRef]183. Panwar, R.; Raghuwanshi, N.; Srivastava, A.K.; Sharma, A.K.; Pruthi, V. In-vivo sustained release of nanoencapsulated ferulicacid and its impact in induced diabetes. Mater. Sci. Eng. C Mater. Biol. Appl. 2018, 92, 381–392. [CrossRef] [PubMed]184. Samad, M.B.; Mohsin, M.; Bin, N.A.; Razu, B.A.; Hossain, M.T.; Mahzabeen, S.; Unnoor, N.; Muna, I.A.; Akhter, F.; Kabir, A.U.[6]-Gingerol, from Zingiber officinale, potentiates GLP-1 mediated glucose-stimulated insulin secretion pathway in pancreaticβ-cells and increases RAB8/RAB10-regulated membrane presentation of GLUT4 transporters in skeletal muscle to improvehyperglycemia in Leprdb/db type 2 diabetic mice. BMC Complement. Altern. Med. 2017, 17, 395. [CrossRef]185. Araújo, L.S.; da Silva, M.V.; da Silva, C.A.; Borges, M.F.; Palhares, H.M.D.C.; Rocha, L.P.; Corrêa, R.R.M.; Rodrigues Júnior, V.; DosReis, M.A.; Machado, J.R. Analysis of serum inflammatory mediators in type 2 diabetic patients and their influence on renalfunction. PLoS ONE 2020, 15, e0229765. [CrossRef] [PubMed]186. Neufingerl, N.; Eilander, A. Nutrient Intake and Status in Adults Consuming Plant-Based Diets Compared to Meat-Eaters: ASystematic Review. Nutrients 2021, 14, 29. [CrossRef]187. Medawar, E.; Huhn, S.; Villringer, A.; Witte, V.A. The effects of plant-based diets on the body and the brain: A systematic review.Transl. Psychiatry 2019, 9, 226. [CrossRef]188. Sarian, M.N.; Ahmed, Q.U.; Mat So’ad, S.Z.; Alhassan, A.M.; Murugesu, S.; Perumal, V.; Syed Mohamad, S.N.A.; Khatib, A.;Latip, J. Antioxidant and Antidiabetic Effects of Flavonoids: A Structure-Activity Relationship Based Study. BioMed Res. Int. 2017,2017, 8386065. [CrossRef]189. Shang, Q.; Xiang, J.; Zhang, H.; Li, Q.; Tang, Y. The Effect of Polyhydroxylated Alkaloids on Maltase-Glucoamylase. PLoS ONE2013, 8, e70841. [CrossRef]Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individualauthor(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury topeople or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.