moleculesReviewPharmacological Extracts and Molecules from Virola Species:Traditional Uses, Phytochemistry, and Biological ActivityMaría González-Rodríguez 1 , Clara Ruiz-Fernández 1 , Vera Francisco 1,*, Djedjiga Ait Eldjoudi 1,Yousof Ramadan Farrag AbdElHafez 1, Alfonso Cordero-Barreal 1, Jesus Pino 1, Francisca Lago 2,Manuel Campos-Toimil 3 , Glaucimeire Rocha Carvalho 4, Thiago Melo Costa Pereira 4,5and Oreste Gualillo 1,*Citation: González-Rodríguez, M.;Ruiz-Fernández, C.; Francisco, V.; AitEldjoudi, D.; Farrag AbdElHafez, Y.R.;Cordero-Barreal, A.; Pino, J.; Lago, F.;Campos-Toimil, M.; Rocha Carvalho,G.; et al. Pharmacological Extractsand Molecules from Virola Species:Traditional Uses, Phytochemistry,and Biological Activity. Molecules2021, 26, 792. https://doi.org/10.3390/molecules26040792Academic Editor: Raffaele CapassoReceived: 14 December 2020Accepted: 29 January 2021Published: 3 February 2021Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutralwith regard to jurisdictional claims inpublished maps and institutional affil-iations.Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.This article is an open access articledistributed under the terms andconditions of the Creative CommonsAttribution (CC BY) license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).1 SERGAS (Servizo Galego de Saude) and IDIS (Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria de Santiago), The NEIRIDGroup (Neuroendocrine Interactions in Rheumatology and Inflammatory Diseases), Santiago UniversityClinical Hospital, Building C, Travesía da Choupana S/N, 15706 Santiago de Compostela, Spain;maria.gonzalez3112@gmail.com (M.G.-R.); clararf94@gmail.com (C.R.-F.);djidji.aiteldjoudi@gmail.com (D.A.E.); yousof.farrag@gmail.com (Y.R.F.A.); sitoalcorba@gmail.com (A.C-B.);jesus.pino.minguez@sergas.es (J.P.)2 Molecular and Cellular Cardiology Group, SERGAS (Servizo Galego de Saude) and IDIS (Instituto deInvestigación Sanitaria de Santiago), Research Laboratory 7, Santiago University Clinical Hospital,15706 Santiago de Compostela, Spain; francisca.lago.paz@sergas.es3 Fisiología y Farmacología de las Enfermedades Crónicas (FIFAEC), Centro de Investigación en MedicinaMolecular y Enfermedades Crónicas (CIMUS), Universidade de Santiago de Compostela,15782 Santiago de Compostela, Spain; manuel.campos@usc.es4 Pharmaceutical Sciences Graduate Program, Vila Velha University (UVV), ES 29102-920 Vila Velha, Brazil;glauci_meire21@hotmail.com (G.R.C.); pereiratmc@gmail.com (T.M.C.P.)5 Federal Institute of Education, Science and Technology (IFES), ES 29102-920 Vila Velha, Brazil* Correspondence: vlgfrancisco@gmail.com (V.F.); oreste.gualillo@sergas.es (O.G.)Abstract: Virola is the largest genus of Myristicaceae in America, comprising about 60 species ofmedium-sized trees geographically spread from Mexico to southern Brazil. The plant species of thisgenus have been widely used in folk medicine for the treatment of several ailments, such as rheumaticpain, bronchial asthma, tumors in the joints, intestinal worms, halitosis, ulcers, and multiple infec-tions, due to their pharmacological activity. This review presents an updated and comprehensivesummary of Virola species, particularly their ethnomedicinal uses, phytochemistry, and biologicalactivity, to support the safe medicinal use of plant extracts and provide guidance for future research.The Virola spp.’s ethnopharmacology, including in the treatment of stomach pain and gastric ulcers,as well as antimicrobial and tryponosomicidal activities, is attributable to the presence of a myriad ofphytoconstituents, such as flavonoids, tannins, phenolic acids, lignans, arylalkanones, and sitosterol.Hence, such species yield potential leads or molecular scaffolds for the development of new pharma-ceutical formulations, encouraging the elucidation of not-yet-understood action mechanisms andascertaining their safety for humans.Keywords: Myristicaceae; pharmacology; phytotherapy; Virola surinamensis; Virola sebifera; resin;essential oil; flavonoid; lignan; alkaloid1. IntroductionPlant extracts have long been used as illness remedies in traditional medicine. Indeed,most of the new small-molecule and chemical entities of currently available drugs are de-rived from natural products, which are still widely used as sources of new drugs/leads [1].Medicinal plants refer to any plants containing substances that can be used for therapeuticpurposes or whose active principles can be used as precursors for the synthesis of newdrugs. Tropical forest medicinal plants have been extensively used by indigenous peoplesto treat several ailments, including cancerous, neurological, infectious, cardiovascular,Molecules 2021, 26, 792. https://doi.org/10.3390/molecules26040792 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/moleculesMolecules 2021, 26, 792 2 of 13immunological, inflammatory, and related diseases. Thus, the identification of possiblebioactive compounds useful for medicine is of great importance to the pharmaceuticalindustry because they can provide new chemical entities or pharmacophores for drugdevelopment [2].The Virola genus of the Myristicaceae family is found throughout tropical America,where these species have diverse local ethnobotanical uses [3]. Seed oils of Virola are usedas machinery lubricants or soap ingredients or to make candles with intense light, littlesmoke, and fragrant smells. The seeds and arils can also be used to flavor beverages,such as chocolate drinks, while Virola wood is used for construction and carpentry [3].Besides their non-medicinal benefits, Virola are perhaps best known for their hallucinogenicproperties, which are often used in South American indigenous cultural practices [4].Moreover, the reddish exudate of various Virola spp. is applied to treat skin conditions,alleviate tooth pain, and soothe colic, and as an anti-bleeding substance to treat ulceratingsores and wounds, as well as hemorrhoids. Additionally, the seed oils have many folkmedicine applications, such as the treatment of asthma, rheumatism, tumors of the joints,intestinal worms, skin diseases, erysipelas, hemorrhoids, and bad breath [3]. Therefore,in the last few years, growing research has evaluated the biological effects of species fromthe Virola genus, identifying new promising bioactive compounds.Here, we present an updated and comprehensive review on Virola species, focusingon their ethnopharmacological uses and phytochemistry. The botany of the Virola genus,in particular, the distinctive morphological and anatomic characteristics of various Virolaspecies, are also described in order to support exact species identification, which is rele-vant for the establishment of unique and unequivocal pharmacological activities, and thereproducibility of research on the biological activity of their phytochemicals. The final aimof this review is to support the safe medicinal use of plant extracts and provide guidancefor future research on new molecules with pharmaceutical activity.2. Botany2.1. TaxonomyThe Myristicaceae family belongs to the Magnoliopsida class, Magnolianae superorder,and magnoliid order Magnoliales [5], and contains 21 genera and nearly 500 species ofwoody trees, shrubs, and some lianas. The Virola Aubl. genus is the fourth largest, and thebiggest one in America, comprising around 60 species (please see [3] for a comprehensivetaxonomic synopsis). An extensive description of all the Virola spp. is outside the scope ofthis review; instead, we summarize the available literature on the species with describedethnopharmacological uses and biological activity, namely, Virola elongata, Virola peruviana,Virola venosa, Virola oleifera, Virola sebifera, Virola pavonis, and Virola surinamensis.2.2. Morphology and AnatomyThe plants of the Virola genus are characterized by distinctive growth forms and fruit.In particular, they grow as monopodial, orthotropic principal shoots, and plagiotropic lat-eral branches with distichous phyllotaxy—myristicaceous branching; the fruit’s maturationis accompanied by dehisce into two valves, displaying a single seed covered by a brightlycolored laciniate aril rich in proteins, lipids, and sugars. These seeds are mainly dispersedby birds and monkeys [3]. Below, we mention the distinctive morphologic and anatomiccharacteristics of the main Virola species.Virola elongata (synonym Virola cuspidata [6]) has an abaxial leaf surface sparselypubescent, trichomes that are concolorous, trichome branches 0.1–0.2 mm long, pedun-cles of staminate inflorescences 0.07–0.15 cm thick, staminate flowers with the perianths1.5–1.9 mm long, fruits 1.6–1.9 × 0.9–1.1 cm, a line of dehiscence canaliculate or smooth,and pericarp 0.5–0.7 mm thick [3].Virola peruviana comprises trees up to 40 m, with tomentose and glabrescent branches,that have the following features: oblong leaves 15–35 × 6–11 cm; a cuspid or acuminateapex; a rounded or subchordinate base; a glabrous upper surface; a lower side with stellateMolecules 2021, 26, 792 3 of 13trichomes; a sessile, glabrescent base; a glabrous upper surface; a sessile, glabrescent lowerside with secondary stellate trichomes; a middle vein that is flat or slightly emergentand secondary ones flat or imprinted on the bundle, both emerging on the underside,secondary veins in 17–30 pairs; slightly brochidodromal camptodromes; inconspicuoustertiary venation [7].Virola pavonis consists of trees up to 25 m with stilt roots, and ferruginous-tomentoseor glabrate twigs, with leaves that are oblong–elliptical or obovate–elliptical. They have di-mensions of 7–21× 1.5–4.5 cm, a subacute or obtusely cuspid apex, an obtuse or attenuatedbase, a densely ferruginous-tumultuous upper surface, sessile trichomes, secondary veinsimprinted on the upper surface emerging on the underside in 14–22 pairs in an archedbrochidodrome, and petioles 4–13 mm long [7].Virola sebifera are trees up to 30 m, sometimes with stilt, tabular roots; twigs that aretomentose and then puberulent and glabrescent; leaves that are ovate, oblong, elliptical,or oblong–deltoid; dimensions of 15–47 × 6–15 cm; a sharp or cuspid apex; a cordatebase; a truncated, rounded, or broadly obtuse shape; an upper surface that is glabrousor sometimes pubescent in the middle vein; an underside that is dense and uniformlytomentose; persistent or evanescent trichomes that are dendritic, stellate, or irregularlybranched; a middle vein that is slightly emergent and sometimes with two coasts andsecondary ones imprinted on the upper surface, both emerging on the underside; secondaryveins in 10–28 pairs, in a scalloped brochidodrome; and subparallel tertiary venation thatis not very conspicuous [7].Virola venosa are trees up to 30 m and have ellipsoidal or subglobular fruits, with di-mensions of 19–22 mm long and 16–18 mm in diameter [8]. They have glabrous or sparsepubescent leaves on the bottom part and are wedged at the base, with thin venules andremarkable prominules in both parts, and inflorescences with 2–3 branches [9].Virola oleifera is a semideciduous tree growing 20–30 m tall; the bole, which is usuallystraight and cylindrical, can be free of branches for up to 21 m, and it is 50–90 cm indiameter [10]. This species has oblong or linear leaves with parallel characteristic margins,about four times longer than wide, and powdery young lateral branches, which are fewand short, with ovoid–ellipsoid fruits; it is acute or spat at the apex [9].Virola surinamensis is an evergreen tree growing 25–35 m tall. The straight, cylindricalbole is buttressed; it can be free of branches for 15–18 m and is 60–90 cm in diameter.The leaf morphology implies numerous lateral veins, and stellate and sessile trichomesscattered on the abaxial surface of the leaf blades. This species has sometimes beenidentified as Virola nobilis. Both species’ leaves’ sizes and morphology may be similar;however, they tend to be smaller in V. surinamensis, and it also has inflorescence axes thatare longer and with many more flowers. V. surinamensis is characterized by having a shorterperianth that is also fleshy to submembranous and smaller fruits that are also ovoid tosubglobose, glabrescent, and with a thin pericarp [11].2.3. Geographic DistributionVirola species are extensively distributed in tropical America, being identified fromMexico to southern Brazil but rarely in El Salvador [3]. Of note, V. surinamensis is the onlyspecies found in the West Indies. The species richness is greater in western Amazonia,particularly in Brazil (~35 spp.), Colombia (~29 spp.), and Peru (~23 spp.). Central America,Costa Rica, and Panama have the highest concentration and diversity of Virola species.They are found mostly in humid forests below 800 m elevation. [3] Specifically, V. elongatagrows in Panama to Brazil; V. sebifera, from Honduras to Brazil; both of them are verycommon in South America [3]. On the other hand, the species V. pavonis and V. peruvianaare located in the Peruvian Amazon [12,13]. V. venosa is found in the Colombian Amazonregion [14] and Brazil [15]. V. oleifera grows in the Atlantic Forest [16]; V. sebifera, in Hon-duras, Nicaragua, Costa Rica, and Panama [3]; and V. surinamensis is distributed from CostaRica to the Amazon basin [17].Molecules 2021, 26, 792 4 of 133. Ethnopharmacological UsesMany of the Virola species are exploited for their medicinal properties by local inhabi-tants to treat and/or manage common human ailments, such as mental instability, infectedwounds, skin infections, colic, and vitiligo [14]. Considering their relevant therapeuticactivity in traditional practice, increasing research has been performed to support Virolaspecies’ ethnopharmacological uses and identify their mechanisms of action as well asbioactive compounds (Table 1), ensuring toxicological safety.Molecules 2021, 26, 792 5 of 13Table 1. Ethnomedicinal uses, biological activity, and bioactive phytochemicals of Virola species.Species Plant Part Used Type of Extract Traditional UsesBioactivityand Mechanism of Action(In Vitro and In Vivo Models)Type ofCompound Compound Identified Ref.V. elongata(orV. cuspidata)Stem barkHydro-ethanolicStomach painIndigestionGastric ulcersGastroprotective/antiulcer:antioxidant, gastric secretion, and total acidityreduction(rodent models of acute and chronic gastriculcers)Phenolic acids Gallic acid[6]Stilbenes 3,3′,4-trihydroxystilbeneFlavonoids CatechinRutinNeolignans ArylnaphtaleneDibenzylbutaneAntiproliferative in colon adenocarcinoma cells:cell cycle arrest in G2/M,anti-mitotic activitythrough tubulin polymerization inhibition(Caco-2 cell line)Stilbenes(Z)-3,5,4′-trihydroxystilbene(resveratrol analog)[18]Psychoactive Alkaloids(β-carbolines)6-methoxyharmalan6-methoxyharman [19]V. peruviana Coarse bark Petroleum etherextraction Hallucinogenic Alkaloids5-methoxy-N,N-dimethyltryptamineN,N-dimethyltryptamine5-methoxytryptamine[12]V. sebifera Leaves DichloromethaneCytotoxic and antiproliferative in cancer cells(human ovarian OVCAR03 andmultidrug-resistance-phenotype NCI-ADRtumor cell lines)Polyketide3,5-dihydro-2-(1′-oxo-3′-hexadecenil)-2-cyclohexen-1-one [20,21]Acylresorcinol (4′Z)1-hexadec-4′-enoyl-2,6-dihydroxybenzeneV. oleifera Seed OilRheumatic painBronchial asthmaJoint tumorsIntestinal wormsHalitosisHemorrhoidsSkin diseases[9]Molecules 2021, 26, 792 6 of 13Table 1. Cont.Species Plant Part Used Type of Extract Traditional UsesBioactivityand Mechanism of Action(In Vitro and In Vivo Models)Type ofCompound Compound Identified Ref.Resin Plant fluidexudate collectionChronic wound healingHemoptysis LeukorrheaDiarrheaGastroprotective/antiulcer:antioxidant activity(ethanol/HCl and indomethacin ulcer-inductionmouse models)Flavonoids EpicatechinEriodictyol[16]TanninsAtheroprotective:systemic and local antioxidant andanti-inflammatory activity(LDLr−/− mouse model)Nephroprotective:antioxidant and antiapoptotic in renalglomerular and tubular cells(contrast-induced nephropathy mouse model)Phenolic acids Ferulic acidGallic acid[22]Flavonoids QuercetinLeaves Methanolic AnalgesicAnalgesic(writhing test in mice)Flavonoids QuercitrinAstilbin [23]Neolignans Oleiferin-CV. surinamensisResin EthanolicUlcerGastritisInflammationCancerAntiulcer:inhibition of gastric lesions(ethanol/HCl, indomethacin, stress, and pylorusligature ulcer-induction mouse models)Flavonoids Epicatechin[24–26]Stem bark EthanolicInflammationCancerAntibacterialAntifungal(diameter of the inhibition zone test)Phenolic compoundsFlavonoids CatechinTanninsLeavesInfusion ColicDyspepsiaAntinociceptive(acetic acid-induced abdominal writhing test andformalin test in mice)Anti-inflammatory(croton oil-induced ear oedema test in mice)Neolignans GrandisinHexane Anti-schistosomal and anti-leishmanial activity(in vitro tests) Neolignans Surinamensin [27,28]Plantlet leaves Essential oil Malaria Antimalarial(in vitro test) Sesquiterpenes Nerolidol [29]Twig Dichloromethane Trypanosomicidal activity(in vitro test against Trypanosoma cruzi)Lignans andneolignansVeraguensinGrandisin [30]Inhibition of CYP2C9 and CYP3A4/5 Neolignans Grandisin [31]Molecules 2021, 26, 792 7 of 13Table 1. Cont.Species Plant Part Used Type of Extract Traditional UsesBioactivityand Mechanism of Action(In Vitro and In Vivo Models)Type ofCompound Compound Identified Ref.V. venosa BarkLeaves Methanolic AntioxidantAntioxidant and α-glucosidase-inhibitoryactivity(DPPH and α-glucosidase-inhibition assay)Phenolic acidsFerulic acidGallic acidρ-coumaric acid[15]FlavonoidsQuercetinQuercitrinKaempferolCatechinNeolignans Oleiferin-CV. pavonis RootBark stem DecoctionSkin infectionOral mycosisAntimicrobial(in vitro tests) [13]Molecules 2021, 26, 792 8 of 13V. elongata stem bark hydroethanolic extract is used for the treatment of stomach pain,indigestion, and gastric ulcers. This extract attenuates gastric ulceration by enhancinggastroprotection through its antioxidant properties and ability to significantly reducegastric secretion and acidity in mouse and rat models of acute (acidified ethanol, piroxicam,and restraint-in-water stress) and chronic (acetic acid) gastric ulcers at doses of 100, 300,and 900 mg/kg p.o. (per os, orally) [6]. The aqueous infusion or the hydroethanolicmacerate of the stem bark of V. elongata is also used in Brazilian and Ecuadorian indigenousfolk medicine for the treatment of venereal diseases, abnormal vaginal secretions, infections,and cancer and for blood purification and wound healing [6]. Furthermore, V. elongata hasshown tranquilizing effects and locomotor central nervous system depression, being usedas a hallucinogenic drug because of its alkaloids [32].In popular medicine, V. oleifera is used to accelerate wound recovery and to treat painand inflammatory conditions [9]. The oil extracted from the seeds of V. oleifera is popularlyused for rheumatic pain, bronchial asthma, tumors in the joints, intestinal worms, halitosis,hemorrhoids, and skin diseases [9]. Validating its traditional use, V. oleifera resin (Figure 1)demonstrated gastroprotective effects (reduced gastric mucosal damage) in an ethanol/HCland indomethacin ulcer-induction mouse model at 10 and 100 mg/kg when administeredorally 30 min before gastric lesion induction, comparable to the reference control lanso-prazole (3 mg/kg) [16]. Moreover, the chronic administration of antioxidant resin fromV. oleifera (50 mg/kg administered orally) also attenuates atherogenesis in the atheroscle-rotic LDLr−/− mouse model, through a decrease in vascular lipid deposition, the protectionof the vascular endothelium and smooth muscle cells against peroxide-induced cytotox-icity, and the reduction of LPS-induced nitric oxide production in macrophages. Thus,V. oleifera resin’s anti-atherogenic activity might be mediated by systemic as well as localantioxidant and anti-inflammatory mechanisms [22]. Furthermore, the evaluation of theV. oleifera resin (300 mg/kg) in mice has suggested it to be a potential therapeutic solutionfor radiocontrast-induced nephropathy, due to its antioxidant and antiapoptotic effects andits ability to preserve kidney function by reducing renal dysfunction and morphologicaltubular injury [33]. Our current work also supports the ethnopharmacological use ofV. oleifera in musculoskeletal malignancies, namely, multiple myeloma, and evidenced itspotential as an adjuvant therapy to optimize dexamethasone’s pharmacologic effects andovercome cell drug resistance; nevertheless, herb–drug interactions with the proteasomeinhibitor bortezomib could limit its clinical use (unpublished data).Molecules 2021, 26, x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 14   V. elongata stem bark hydroethanolic extract is used for the treatment of stomach pain, indigestion, and gastric ulcers. This extract attenuates gastric ulceration by enhancing gastroprotection through its antioxidant properties and ability to significantly reduce gastric secretion and acidity in mouse and rat models of acute (acidified ethanol, piroxicam, and restraint-in-water stress) and chronic (acetic acid) gastric ulcers t doses of 100, 300   900 mg/kg p.o. (p r os, orally) [6]. The aqueous i fusio  or the hydroethanolic macerate of the stem bark of V. elongata is also used in Brazilian and Ecuadorian indigenous folk medicine for the treatment of venereal dise ses, abnormal vaginal secretions, infection ,  ancer and for blood purification and wound healing [6]. Furthermore, V. elongata has shown tranquilizing ef ects and locomot r ce tral nervous system d pression, being used as a halluci ogenic drug be ause of its alkaloids [32]. In popular medicine, V. oleifera is used to accelerate wound recovery and to treat pain and inflammatory conditions [9]. The oil extracted from the seeds of V. oleifera is popularly used for rheumatic pain, bronchial asthma, tumors in the joints, intestinal worms, halitosis, hemorrhoids, and skin diseases [9]. Validating its traditional use, V. oleifera resin (Figure 1) demonstrated gastroprotective effects (reduced gastric mucosal damage) in an ethanol/HCl and indomethacin ulcer-induction mouse model at 10 and 100 mg/kg when administered orally 30 min before gastric lesion induction, comparable to the reference control lansoprazole (3 mg/kg) [16]. Moreover, the chronic administration of antioxidant resin from V. oleifera (50 mg/kg administered orally) also attenuates atherogenesis in the atherosclerotic LDLr−/− mouse model, through a decrease in vascular lipid deposition, the protection of the vascular endothelium and smooth muscle cells against peroxide-induced cytotoxicity, and the reduction of LPS-induced nitric oxide production in macrophages. Thus, V. oleifera resin’s anti-atherogenic activity might be mediated by systemic as well as local antioxidant and anti-inflammatory mechanisms [22]. Furthermore, the evaluation of the V. oleifera resin (300 mg/kg) in mice has suggested it to be a potential therapeutic solution for radiocontrast-induced nephropathy, due to its antioxidant and antiapoptotic effects and its ability to preserve kidney function by reducing renal dysfunction and morphological tubular injury [33]. Our current work also supports the ethnopharmacological use of V. oleifera in musculoskeletal malignancies, namely, multiple myeloma, and evidenced its potential as an adjuvant therapy to optimize dexamethasone’s pharmacologic effects and overcome cell drug resistance; nevertheless, herb–drug interactions with the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib could limit its clinical use (unpublished data).  Figure 1. Virola oleifera in Espirito Santo, Brazil. The resin was collected from 0.5 cm-deep incisions in the tree trunk, as demonstrated in (A), and transferred into an amber glass vial (B). The fluid exudate was dried at 40 °C (C) and ground. Afterwards, the resin was sheltered from light at 4 °C Figure 1. Virola oleifera in Espirito Santo, Brazil. he resin as collected from 0.5 cm-deep incisions inthe tree trunk, as demonstra ed in (A), and transferr d into an amber glass vial (B). The fluid exudatewas dried at 40 ◦C (C) and grou . Afterwards, the resin was sheltered from light at 4 ◦C un il usedas shown in (D). Previous chemical characterization by our research group revealed a high content ofpolyphenols, the main compounds demonstrated in (E) [16,33].V. surinamensis is widely used by the riverside inhabitants of the floodplain forest ofthe Mazagão River in the Brazilian Amazon to treat different disorders [34]. In particular,Molecules 2021, 26, 792 9 of 13V. surinamensis seed oil is used topically for inflammatory skin conditions and as a pre-ventive for microbial infections during wound healing. The oil is also used as a repellent.Leaf and bark decoctions are used as oral preparations for the treatment of inflammationin the digestive, urinary, and reproductive systems. Bark and fruit decoctions are used forintestinal infections, while exudate poultices are applied topically for furunculosis [34].The resin obtained by cuts in the stem bark is also a reputed folk remedy in its natural formfor the treatment of ulcers, gastritis, inflammation, cancer, erysipelas, colic, and dyspep-sia [25,26]. Accordingly, the ethanolic extract (EE) of V. surinamensis resin has demonstratedpreventive activity in rodent models of gastric mucosal disease [26]. Pre-treatment withthe V. surinamensis resin EE (500mg/kg, p.o.) significantly inhibits mucosal injury (95%inhibition) in a gastric hemorrhagic ulcerative lesion model induced by an acidified ethanolsolution. At the same dose, this extract also significantly reduced the formation of gastriclesions induced by indomethacin (39%), stress (45%), and pylorus ligature (31%) in mice,when compared to control animals. Interestingly, a comparison between the oral andintraduodenal administration of the V. surinamensis resin extract indicated therapeuticactivity by local action, since no changes in gastric biochemical parameters (pH or totalacid) were observed after intraduodenal administration [26]. Being the main constituentof V. surinamensis resin EE, epicatechin was suggested to be among the active principlesresponsible for the plant’s antiulcer activity [26]. An ethanolic extract of V. surinamensisstem bark was prepared and dried, and a 10% (w/v) solution diluted in dimethylsulfoxidewas further tested for antimicrobial activity by measuring the diameter of the growthinhibition zone [25]. The extract exhibited antibacterial activity, particularly against Gram-negative microorganisms, thus providing preliminary scientific validation of its traditionalmedicinal uses. The phytoconstituents responsible for the antibacterial activity have notyet been identified, but it may be attributable to the presence of high concentrations oftannins, phenolic compounds, or catechin [25].Furthermore, V. pavonis root and stem bark decoction is also known to be used for thetreatment of skin infections and mucal mycosis [13].4. PhytochemistryAlong with the determination of Virola spp.’s bioactivity, the characterization ofthe chemical composition, both compound identification and quantification, has alsobeen performed. Furthermore, some studies have discussed the contribution of isolatedcompounds to the whole extract’s activity.The chemical characterization of a stem bark hydroethanolic extract of Virola elongatarevealed a content of 14.6% phenolic compounds (around 50% are flavonoids), among whichare known antiulcer phenolic compounds, such as gallic acid, catechin, and rutin [6]. Quinicacid, 3,3′,4-trihydroxystilbene, juruenolid D, one catechin dimer, one C-glycosyl flavonoid,one polyketide, and two neolignans were also identified as major components of the stembark hydroethanolic extract [6]. V. elongata (also known as V. cuspidata) contains the nat-ural resveratrol analog (Z)-3,5,4′-trimethoxystilbene, which completely abrogated Caco-2cell growth at 0.4 µM, while an 80% cell growth inhibition was observed at 0.3 µM (IC50:0.25 µM). Analysis of its mechanisms of action indicated a blockage of the G2/M phaseand the inhibition of tubulin’s polymerization, which plays a key role in neoplastic diseasedevelopment [18]. Of note, under the same conditions, the (E)-3,5,4′-trihydroxystilbene(resveratrol) also showed a 70% inhibition of Caco-2 cell growth but at a higher concentrationof 25 µM, which means that (Z)-3,5,4′-trihydroxystilbene is 100-fold more active than resver-atrol [18]. The β-carbolines 6-methoxyharmalan and 6-methoxyharman, which have beensuggested to possess some psychoactive effects, have also been isolated from V. elongata [19].The isolation of 5-methoxy-N,N-dimethyltryptamine as well as the identification ofN,N-dimethyltryptamine and 5-methoxytryptamine in V. peruviana has shown that thecompounds may have hallucinogenic effects [12].The bioassay-guided fractionation of a V. sebifera dichloromethane leaf extract iso-lated and elucidated the structure of polyketide 3,5-dihydro-2-(1′-oxo-3′-hexadecenil)-2-Molecules 2021, 26, 792 10 of 13cyclohexen-1-one, which showed cytotoxic activity selective against the human tumor celllines OVCAR03 (ovarian) and NCI-ADR (with a multidrug-resistance phenotype), in adose-dependent way (IC50: 2–4 µg/mL) [20,21]. Additionally, the antiproliferative proper-ties of V. sebifera (4′Z)1-hexadec-4′-enoyl-2,6-dihydroxybenzene [21] and polyketides fromthe leaves were reported, presenting moderate activity in all the cancer cell lines evaluated(IC50: 41–176 µg/mL) [20]. Additionally, two lignans were described in V. sebifera, rel-(8R,8′R)—3 4:3′, 4′-bis-(methylendioxy)-7.7′-dioxo-lignan and (7′R, (‘S,8S)-2′-hydroxy-3,4:4,5′-bis-(methylenedioxy) -7oxo-2,7′-cyclolignan [35], whose antioxidant activity was furtherdemonstrated, similarly to that for other natural aryltetralone lignans [36].V. venosa’s blooms, fruits, and seeds contain flavonoids, lignans, arylalkanones,and sitosterol, while alkaloids and stilbenes are present in the leaves and roots [37]. Ary-lalkanones or acylarylrecorcinols have been found not only in V. venosa (both fruits andbark) but also in V. elongata, V. surinamensis, and V. sebifera [14]. Research investigating theα-glucosidase inhibitory activity of V. venosa and its bioactive compounds revealed that themethanolic extracts of the bark and leaf had a high content of phenolic compounds, demon-strating a high activity in antioxidant and α-glucosidase-inhibitory tests. These resultsare therapeutically relevant since inhibitors of α-glucosidase are potential compounds forthe treatment of diabetes because they reduce diet-induced hyperglycemia by inhibitingthis intestinal enzyme [15]. Furthermore, the activity-guided fractionation of V venosamethanolic bark and leaf extracts showed the presence of phenolic acids (ferulic acid, gallicacid, and ρ-coumaric acid) and flavonoids (quercetin, quercetrin, kaempferol, and cate-chin), and identified ferulic acid as the main bioactive compound for the antioxidant andα-glucosidase-inhibitory activities [15].The renoprotective activity of V. oleifera resin may be attributable, at least in part, to thepresence of antioxidant species, such as ferulic acid, gallic acid, and quercetin, previouslyidentified by our group [33]. Moreover, we also described that the gastroprotective effectof this extract could be related to the content of polyphenols (~82%), namely, tannins(67.66 g/100 g of resin), phenolic acids, and flavonoids (48.257 ± 28.27 mg quercetinequivalent/100 g of resin), particularly epicatechin and eriodictyol [16]. V. oleifera leafmethanolic extracts have shown promising results as an analgesic treatment, which couldbe related to the oleiferin-C and flavonoid (quercitrin and astilbin) content [23]. The ad-ministration of V. oleifera leaf methanolic extract (10 mg/kg i.p.) inhibited acetic acid-induced abdominal constriction in mice similarly to aspirin or paracetamol [23]. Notably,oleiferin-C dose-dependently inhibited abdominal constriction by 76% at 29.2 µmol/kg(ID50: 17.2 µmol/kg), being 7.5-fold more active than aspirin (ID50: 125 µmol/kg) orparacetamol (ID50: 133 µmol/kg). In this study, the compounds quercitrin (quercetin-3-O-rhamnoside) and astilbin (taxifolin-3-O-rhamnoside) were also identified in the ethylacetate fraction in a 2:1 ratio (quercitrin: astilbin), causing a reduction of 63% in abdominalmuscle constriction. Since astilbin is inactive as an analgesic in mice, the effects of thequercitrin:astilbin mixture are likely due to quercitrin itself or to a potentiating synergisticeffect between the two compounds [23].Surinamensin is a natural neolignan isolated from the leaves of V. surinamensis,whose activity against Leishmania donovani amastigotes and promastigotes was testedin vitro based on its anti-schistosomal activity [27]. Steroids, lignans, flavonoids, and polyke-tides were also isolated from V. surinamensis [27]. The results revealed that surinamensinis active against L. donovani promastigotes but showed no selective toxicity when testedagainst the amastigotes in the mouse peritoneal macrophage model [28]. Besides, the 8.O.4′-neolignan 3,4,5-trimethoxy-8[3′,5′-dimethoxy-4′-propenylphenoxy]-phenylpropane wasisolated from Virola pavonis, and it showed in vitro anti-L. donovani promastigote activity at100 µM in an assay using extracellular promastigotes [28].The neolignan grandisin was identified in V. surinamensis as well as in several Brazilianplant species used in popular medicine for the treatment of colic, inflammation, rheumatism,dyspepsia, and liver dysfunction. The antinociceptive and anti-inflammatory propertiesof grandisin have been investigated [24]. Treatment with grandisin (1, 3, and 10 mg/kg)Molecules 2021, 26, 792 11 of 13dose-dependently reduced the number of acetic acid-induced abdominal writhes in mice,similarly to indomethacin at the highest dose used. Furthermore, the data indicated thatthe antinociceptive activity of grandisin is not dependent on motor incoordination orsedation due to the depressant effect in the CNS. The further evaluation of grandisin’santinociceptive and anti-inflammatory activities in rodent models using the formalintest (a 60.5% reduction in paw licking time only in the inflammatory phase response),the croton oil-induced ear edema test (a 36.4% edema reduction at 10 mg/kg), and thecarrageenan-induced peritonitis test (no effect at the concentrations tested) suggested thatthe mechanism of action of grandisin is not associated with the inhibition of events inthe late stage of the inflammatory process, in which chemotaxis and cell migration occur.Instead, grandisin is hypothesized to reduce prostaglandin formation and/or activitythrough the inhibition of cyclooxygenase activity or prostaglandin receptor antagonistaction. These results support the traditional use of grandisin-rich plants, such as V. suri-namensis, in the treatment of symptoms caused by an inflammatory process such as painand edema [24]. Grandisin was also identified as a potential drug candidate due to itsantitumor and trypanocidal activities. Furthermore, grandisin is a competitive inhibitor ofCYP2C9 and a competitive and mechanism-based inhibitor of CYP3A4/5 [31].The essential oil obtained from adult and plantlet leaves of V. surinamensis has also beenanalyzed by GC–MS, and 11 monoterpenes, 11 sesquiterpenes, and three phenylpropanoidswere identified. The plantlet essential oil caused 100% growth inhibition after 48 h in thedevelopment of the young trophozoite to the schizont stage, and the sesquiterpene nerolidolwas identified as one of the active constituents, indicating a potential antimalarial use [29].Dichioromethane extracts from V. surinamensis twigs showed in vitro trypanosomicidalactivity against the trypomastigote form of Trypanosoma cruzi [30]. Costa et al. suggestedthat V. surinamensis’s antimicrobial activity is due to its tannin content [25].5. ConclusionsPhytotherapy and the use of medicinal plants are traditionally part of the popularknowledge of different populations, users, and practitioners. The World Health Organiza-tion estimated that 80% of the developing countries’ population still relies on traditionalmedicines, medicinal plants being the most used, for its primary health care; they consti-tute an effective therapeutic form for the lower-income community. As evidenced in thisreview, Virola genus species are broadly used by local American inhabitants due to theirbeneficial effects on digestive conditions and rheumatic diseases, as well as inflammatoryand infectious illnesses. In the last few years, several efforts have been made to validatethe traditional uses of Virola spp. in human health and to identify bioactive phytochem-icals. Several phenolic compounds, alkaloids, sesquiterpenes, lignans, and neolignanshave been identified as antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, antinociceptive, and antimicrobialcompounds. Of note, most of the studies were conducted on in vivo models, thus con-firming their efficacy, therapeutic doses, and bioavailability. In this context, Virola genusspecies are evidenced as potential sources of therapeutic leads, offering novel opportunitiesin the search for new drugs. However, further basic and clinical research is needed toclarify and confirm the biological actions of Virola species and their bioactive molecules,minimizing the possible side and toxicological effects. Finally, studies on the potentialherb–drug interactions as well as structure–activity relationships will be of relevance in thedevelopment of new pharmaceutics derived from Virola species phytochemicals.Author Contributions: M.G.-R., C.R.-F., V.F., D.A.E., Y.R.F.A., A.C.-B., J.P., F.L., M.C.-T., G.R.C.,T.M.C.P., O.G. commented on the manuscript and provided edits and feedback. O.G. takes responsi-bility for the accuracy and integrity of the information contained in this article. All authors have readand agreed to the published version of the manuscript.Funding: This work was supported by Xunta de Galicia (Servizo Galego de Saude, SERGAS), througha research-staff contract (ISCIII/SERGAS) to O.G. and F.L., who are Staff Personnel (I3SNS stable Re-searcher); by Instituto de Salud Carlos III (ISCIII) and by FEDER through a “Sara Borrell” Researchercontract to V.F. (CD16/00111); and a predoctoral research scholarship to C.R.-F. (Exp.18/00188).Molecules 2021, 26, 792 12 of 13M.G.-R. is a recipient of a predoctoral contract funded by Xunta de Galicia (IN606A-2020/010).A.C.-B. is a recipient of a predoctoral contract funded by Secretaría de Estado de Universidades,Investigación, Desarrollo e Innovación, Ministerio de Universidades (FPU2018-04165). G.R.C. is adoctoral student of the Coordination for the Improvement of Higher Education Personnel (CAPES)with a doctoral scholarship (Finance Code 001). T.M.C.P. is a Research Productivity Fellow of theNational Council for Scientific and Technological Development (CNPq), Brazil (TMCP 309277/2019-1). O.G. is a member of the RETICS Programme (RD16/0012/0014) (RIER: Red de Investigaciónen Inflamación y Enfermedades Reumáticas) via ISCIII and FEDER. F.L. is a member of CIBERCV(Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Cardiovasculares). ISCIII and FEDERalso support O.G. and J.P. (PI17/00409 and PI20/00902). This work was supported by the ResearchExecutive Agency of the European Union in the framework of the MSCA-RISE Action of the H2020Programme (project number, 734899), and Xunta de Galicia, Consellería de Educación, Universi-dade e Formación Profesional, and Consellería de Economía, Emprego e Industria (GAIN) (GPCIN607B2019/10), supported O.G.Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.Data Availability Statement: The data presented in this study are available in the cited articles.Acknowledgments: G.R.C. would like to thank the Coordination for the Improvement of HigherEducation Personnel (CAPES) for the doctoral scholarship (Finance Code 001).Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The funders had no role in the designof the study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; orin the decision to publish the results.References1. Newman, D.J.; Cragg, G.M. Natural products as sources of new drugs over the nearly four decades from 01/1981 to 09/2019.J. Nat. Prod. 2020, 83, 770–803. [CrossRef] [PubMed]2. Zimmermann, T.; Drašar, P.B.; Rimpelová, S.; Christensen, S.B.; Khripach, V.A.; Jurášek, M. Large Scale Conversion of Trilobolideinto the Payload of Mipsagargin: 8-O-(12-Aminododecanoyl)-8-O-Debutanoylthapsigargin. Biomolecules 2020, 10, 1640. [CrossRef][PubMed]3. Santamaría-Aguilar, D.; Aguilar, R.; Lagomarsino, L.P. A taxonomic synopsis of Virola (Myristicaceae) in Mesoamerica, includingsix new species. PhytoKeys 2019, 134, 1–82. [CrossRef] [PubMed]4. McKenna, D.J.; Towers, G.; Abbott, F. Monoamine oxidase inhibitors in South American hallucinogenic plants: Tryptamine andβ-carboline constituents of Ayahuasca. J. Ethnopharmacol. 1984, 10, 195–223. [CrossRef]5. ITIS Standard Report Page: Lycopodiophytina. 2019. Available online: https://www.itis.gov/servlet/SingleRpt/SingleRpt?search_topic=TSN&search_value=18122#null) (accessed on 16 October 2020).6. De Almeida, G.V.B.; Arunachalam, K.; Balogun, S.O.; Pavan, E.; Ascêncio, S.D.; Soares, I.M.; Zanatta, A.C.; Vilegas, W.; Macho, A.;Martins, D.T.D.O. Chemical characterization and evaluation of gastric antiulcer properties of the hydroethanolic extract of thestem bark of Virola elongata (Benth.) Warb. J. Ethnopharmacol. 2019, 231, 113–124. [CrossRef]7. Ureta Adrianzén, M. Taxonomic Review of the Myristicaceae Family from Central Forest, Oxapampa-Perú. Intropica 2010, 5,29–46.8. Plantes et Botanique. Available online: https://archive.is/20070519184701/http://www.plantes-botanique.be/e2-Myristicaceae-Virola-venosa (accessed on 16 October 2020).9. Rodrigues, W.A. Revisão taxonômica das espécies de Virola Aublet (Myristicaceae) do Brasil. Acta Amaz. 1980, 10, 3–127. [CrossRef]10. Tropical Plants Database, Ken Fern. Available online: http://tropical.theferns.info/viewtropical.php?id=Virola+oleifera (accessedon 16 October 2020).11. Tropical Plants Database, Ken Fern. Available online: http://tropical.theferns.info/viewtropical.php?id=Virola+surinamensis(accessed on 25 October 2020).12. Lai, A.; Tin-Wa, M.; Mika, E.S.; Persinos, G.J.; Farnsworth, N.R. Phytochemical Investigation of Virola peruviana, A NewHallucinogenic Plant. J. Pharm. Sci. 1973, 62, 1561–1563. [CrossRef]13. Roumy, V.; Macedo, J.C.R.; Bonneau, N.; Samaillie, J.; Azaroual, N.; Encinas, L.A.; Rivière, C.; Hennebelle, T.; Sahpaz, S.;Antherieu, S.; et al. Plant therapy in the Peruvian Amazon (Loreto) in case of infectious diseases and its antimicrobial evaluation.J. Ethnopharmacol. 2020, 249, 112411. [CrossRef]14. Castro, E.; Suarez, L.E.C.; Siengalewicz, P.; Gutmann, R.; Czermak, G.; Brueggeller, P. 3,6-Dihydroxy-2-(11-phenylundecanoyl)cyclohex-2-en-1-one from Virola venosa bark. Acta Crystallogr. Sect. C Cryst. Struct. Commun. 2004, 60, 467. [CrossRef]Molecules 2021, 26, 792 13 of 1315. Fernandes, K.R.P.; Bittercourt, P.S.; De Souza, A.Q.L.; De Souza, A.Q.L.; Da Silva, F.M.A.; Lima, E.S.; Acho, L.D.R.; Nunomura,R.D.C.S.; Teixeira, A.F.; Koolen, H.H.F. Phenolic compounds from Virola venosa (Myristicaceae) and evaluation of their antioxidantand enzyme inhibition potential. Acta Amaz. 2019, 49, 48–53. [CrossRef]16. Pereira, A.C.H.; Lenz, D.; Nogueira, B.V.; Scherer, R.; Andrade, T.U.; Da Costa, H.B.; Romão, W.; Pereira, T.M.C.; Endringer, D.C.Gastroprotective activity of the resin from Virola oleifera. Pharm. Biol. 2016, 55, 472–480. [CrossRef] [PubMed]17. Riba-Hernández, P.; Segura, J.L.; Muñoz-Valverde, J. Female fruit production depends on female flower production and crownsize rather than male density in a continuous population of a tropical dioecious tree (Virola surinamensis). Am. J. Bot. 2016, 103,1990–1999. [CrossRef] [PubMed]18. Chabert, P.; Fougerousse, A.; Brouillard, R. Anti-mitotic properties of resveratrol analog (Z)-3,5,4′-trimethoxystilbene. BioFactors2006, 27, 37–46. [CrossRef] [PubMed]19. Cassady, J.M.; E Blair, G.; Raffauf, R.F.; E Tyler, V. The isolation of 6-methoxyharmalan and 6-methoxyharman from Virolacuspidata. Lloydia 1971, 34, 161–162. [PubMed]20. Denny, C.; Zacharias, M.E.; Lúcia, A.; Gois, T.; Amaral, C.E.; Bittrich, V.; Kohn, L.K.; De Oliveira, I.M.; Alexandre, R.; Rodrigues,F.; et al. Antiproliferative Properties of Polyketides Isolated from Virola Sebifera Leaves. Phytother. Res. 2008, 130, 127–130.[CrossRef] [PubMed]21. Pagnocca, F.C.; Ribeiro, S.B.; Torkomian, V.L.V.; Hebling, M.J.A.; Bueno, O.C.; Da Silva, O.A.; Fernandes, J.B.; Vieira, P.C.; Silva,M.F.D.G.F.D.; Ferreira, A.G. Toxicity of lignans to symbiotic fungus of leaf-cutting ants. J. Chem. Ecol. 1996, 22, 1325–1330.[CrossRef]22. Coutinho, P.N.; Pereira, B.P.; Pereira, A.C.H.; Porto, M.L.; De Assis, A.L.E.M.; Destefani, A.C.; Meyrelles, S.S.; Vasquez, E.C.;Nogueira, B.V.; De Andrade, T.U.; et al. Chronic administration of antioxidant resin from Virola oleifera attenuates atherogenesisin LDLr -/- mice. J. Ethnopharmacol. 2017, 206, 65–72. [CrossRef]23. Kuroshima, K.N.; De Campos, F.; De Souza, M.M.; Yunes, R.A.; Monache, F.D.; Filho, V.C. Phytochemical and PharmacologicalInvestigations of Virola oleifera Leaves. Z. Nat. C 2001, 56, 703–706. [CrossRef]24. Carvalho, A.A.V.; Galdino, P.M.; Nascimento, M.V.M.; Kato, M.J.; Valadares, M.C.; Cunha, L.C.; Costa, E.A. Antinociceptive andantiinflammatory activities of grandisin extracted fromVirola surinamensis. Phytother. Res. 2010, 24, 113–118. [CrossRef]25. Costa, E.S.; Hiruma-Lima, C.A.; Lima, E.O.; Sucupira, G.C.; Bertolin, A.O.; Lolis, S.F.; Andrade, F.D.P.; Vilegas, W.; Souza-Brito,A.R.M. Antimicrobial activity of some medicinal plants of the Cerrado, Brazil. Phytother. Res. 2008, 22, 705–707. [CrossRef][PubMed]26. Hiruma-Lima, C.A.; Batista, L.M.; De Almeida, A.B.A.; Magri, L.D.P.; Dos Santos, L.C.; Vilegas, W.; Brito, A.R.M.S. Antiulcerogenicaction of ethanolic extract of the resin from Virola surinamensis Warb. (Myristicaceae). J. Ethnopharmacol. 2009, 122, 406–409.[CrossRef] [PubMed]27. Barata, L.E.; Baker, P.M.; Gottlieb, O.R.; Rúveda, E.A. Neolignans of Virola surinamensis. Phytochemistry 1978, 17, 783–786.[CrossRef]28. Barata, L.E.S.; Santos, L.S.; Ferri, P.H.; Phillipson, J.; Paine, A.; Croft, S.L. Anti-leishmanial activity of neolignans from Virolaspecies and synthetic analogues. Phytochemistry 2000, 55, 589–595. [CrossRef]29. Lopes, N.P.; Kato, M.J.; Eloısa, H.D.A.; Maia, J.G.; Yoshida, M.; Planchart, A.R.; Katzin, A.M. Antimalarial use of volatile oil fromleaves of Virola surinamensis (Rol.) Warb. by Waiãpi Amazon Indians. J. Ethnopharmacol. 1999, 67, 313–319. [CrossRef]30. Lopes, N.P.; Chicaro, P.; Kato, M.J.; De Albuquerque, S.; Yoshida, M. Flavonoids and Lignans fromVirola surinamensisTwigs andtheirin vitroActivity againstTrypanosoma cruzi. Planta Medica 1998, 64, 667–669. [CrossRef]31. Habenschus, M.; Moreira, F.D.L.; Lopes, N.P.; De Oliveira, A.R.M. In Vitro Inhibition of Human CYP450s 1A2, 2C9, 3A4/5, 2D6and 2E1 by Grandisin. Planta Medica 2017, 83, 727–736. [CrossRef]32. Macre, W.D.; Towers, G.N. An ethnopharmacological examination ofVirola elongata bark: A South American arrow poison.J. Ethnopharmacol. 1984, 12, 75–92. [CrossRef]33. Bôa, I.S.F.; Porto, M.L.; Pereira, A.C.H.; Ramos, J.P.L.; Scherer, R.; Oliveira, J.P.; Nogueira, B.V.; Meyrelles, S.S.; Vasquez, E.C.;Endringer, D.C.; et al. Resin from Virola oleifera Protects Against Radiocontrast-Induced Nephropathy in Mice. PLOS ONE 2015,10, e0144329. [CrossRef]34. Sarquis, R.D.S.F.R.; Sarquis, Í.R.; Sarquis, I.R.; Fernandes, C.P.; Da Silva, G.A.; E Silva, R.B.L.; Jardim, M.A.G.; Sánchez-Ortíz, B.L.;Carvalho, J.C.T. The Use of Medicinal Plants in the Riverside Community of the Mazagão River in the Brazilian Amazon, Amapá,Brazil: Ethnobotanical and Ethnopharmacological Studies. Evid. Based Complement. Altern. Med. 2019, 2019, 1–25. [CrossRef]35. Rezende, K.R.; Kato, M.J. Dibenzylbutane and aryltetralone lignans from seeds of Virola sebifera. Phytochemistry 2002, 61, 427–432.[CrossRef]36. Rezende, K.R.; Davino, S.C.; Barros, S.B.; Kato, M.J. Antioxidant activity of aryltetralone lignans and derivatives fromVirolasebifera(Aubl.). Nat. Prod. Res. 2005, 19, 661–666. [CrossRef] [PubMed]37. Kato, M.J.; Yoshida, M.; Gottlieb, O.R. Flavones and lignans in flowers, fruits and seedlings ofVirola venosa. Phytochemistry 1992,31, 283–287. [CrossRef]