Citation: Nugraha, A.S.; Agustina,R.P.; Mirza, S.; Rani, D.M.; Winarto,N.B.; Triatmoko, B.; Pratama, A.N.W.;Keller, P.A.; Wangchuk, P.Phytochemistry and Pharmacologyof Medicinal Plants Used by theTenggerese Society in Java Island ofIndonesia. Molecules 2022, 27, 7532.https://doi.org/10.3390/molecules27217532Academic Editor: Federica PellatiReceived: 11 September 2022Accepted: 1 November 2022Published: 3 November 2022Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutralwith regard to jurisdictional claims inpublished maps and institutional affil-iations.Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.This article is an open access articledistributed under the terms andconditions of the Creative CommonsAttribution (CC BY) license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).moleculesReviewPhytochemistry and Pharmacology of Medicinal Plants Used bythe Tenggerese Society in Java Island of IndonesiaAri Satia Nugraha 1,2,* , Riza Putri Agustina 1, Syafi Mirza 1, Dinar Mutia Rani 1 , Naura Bathari Winarto 1 ,Bawon Triatmoko 1 , Antonius Nugraha Widhi Pratama 1, Paul A. Keller 2 and Phurpa Wangchuk 3,*1 Drug Utilisation and Discovery Research Group, Faculty of Pharmacy, Universitas Jember,Jember 68121, Indonesia2 School of Chemistry, Faculty of Science Medicine and Health, University of Wollongong,Wollongong, NSW 2522, Australia3 Centre for Molecular Therapeutics, Australian Institute of Tropical Health and Medicine, James CookUniversity, Cairns, QLD 4878, Australia* Correspondence: arisatia@unej.ac.id (A.S.N.); phurpa.wangchuk@jcu.edu.au (P.W.);Tel.: +62-331-324-736 (A.S.N.); +61-742321249 (P.W.)Abstract: The archipelagic country of Indonesia is inhabited by 300 ethnic groups, including theindigenous people of Tengger. Based on the reported list of medicinal plants used by the Tenggercommunity, we have reviewed each of them for their phytochemical constituents and pharmacologicalactivities. Out of a total of 41 medicinal plants used by the Tengerrese people, 33 species werestudied for their phytochemical and pharmacological properties. More than 554 phytochemicalswith diverse molecular structures belonging to different chemical classes including flavonoids,terpenoids, saponins and volatiles were identified from these studied 34 medicinal plants. Many ofthese medicinal plants and their compounds have been tested for various pharmacological activitiesincluding anti-inflammatory, antimicrobial, wound healing, headache, antimalarial and hypertension.Five popularly used medicinal plants by the healers were Garcinia mangostana, Apium graveolens,Cayratia clematidea, Drymocallis arguta and Elaeocarpus longifolius. Only A. graviolens were previouslystudied, with the outcomes supporting the pharmacological claims to treat hypertension. Fewunexplored medicinal plants are Physalis lagascae, Piper amplum, Rosa tomentosa and Tagetes tenuifolia,and they present great potential for biodiscovery and drug lead identification.Keywords: Tengger; phytochemistry; pharmacology; Cayratia clematidea; Drymocallis arguta; Elaeocar-pus longifolius; Physalis lagascae; Piper amplum; Rosa tomentosa; Tagetes tenuifolia1. IntroductionSince ancient human civilizations, mankind has used biotic resources including plantsfor clothing, cosmetics, food and medication. The World Health Organisation (WHO)estimated that more than 80 % of the world’s population rely on traditional medicines(TM) for their primary health needs [1]. Plants are the bulk ingredients used in thesemedicaments [1] with an estimated 50,000 plant species used worldwide, the majority ofthem contained within Asian medicines [2]. Most of the Asian medicinal plant knowledgeis passed down uninterrupted from father to son using oral communication, or from masterto apprentices using written scholarly traditions. The most popular scholarly medicaltraditions are Chinese traditional medicine [3], Indian Ayurvedic medicine [4] and SowaRigpa medicine (also practiced in Bhutan) [5]. The former oral traditions, which arepredominantly practiced by remote tribes, are prone to disappearance or extinction [6,7].In Indonesia there are more than 17,000 islands which are rich in biodiversity, especiallythe terrestrial plants. Indonesia has one of the highest numbers of higher plant species,with 22,500 species recorded so far. However, only a miniscule 4.4 % (1000 species) ofthese higher plant species are used as medicinal plants [8]. Since there are 300 ethnicMolecules 2022, 27, 7532. https://doi.org/10.3390/molecules27217532 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/moleculesMolecules 2022, 27, 7532 2 of 25groups/tribes in Indonesia, one would expect to find a rich medicinal plants diversity. Oneof these 300 thriving communities in Indonesia is the Tengger tribal community, residingin the Bromo mountain range (1600–2000 m above sea level, masl) of East Java, with theregion known for its breathtaking views (Figure 1). The people still practice Hinduismfrom the old Majapahit Hindu Kingdom (1300–1500 A.D.) [9], which arrived in Indonesiain the first century through Indian traders, with Brahmin passengers as direct agents intransmitting Hinduism. For this reason, it is likely that Tenggerese ethnobotanical practiceswould resemble Indian Ayurvedic medicines. It is also expected that the mainstreamIslamic traditional medical culture of Indonesia may have influenced the way Tenggeresemedicines have evolved over centuries.Molecules 2022, 27, x FOR PEER REVIEW 2 of 27   species, with 22,500 species recorded so far. However, only a miniscule 4.4 % (1000 spe-cies) of these higher plant species are used as medicinal plants [8]. Since there are 300 ethnic groups/tribes in Indonesia, one would expect to find a rich medicinal plants diver-sity. One of these 300 thriving communities in Indonesia is the Tengger tribal community, residing in the Bromo mountain range (1600–2000 m above sea level, masl) of East Java, with the region known for its breathtaking views (Figure 1). The people still practice Hin-duism from the old Majapahit Hindu Kingdom (1300–1500 A.D.) [9], which arrived in Indonesia in the first century through Indian traders, with Brahmin passengers as direct agents in transmitting Hinduism. F r this reason, it is likely that Tenggerese ethnobotan-ical practices woul  resemble Indian Ayurvedic medicines. It is also expected that the m instre m Islamic traditional m dical culture of Indonesia may have influenced th  way T nggerese m dicines ha  evolved over centuries.   Figure 1. Map of Indonesia. (A) Location of Tengger community within a Javanese island. (B) Bromo mountain range where Tenggerese community live. There is no historical document to substantiate their influences, and there is a need for such studies in Indonesia. There are a few reports on the ethnobotanical studies of the Tenggerese community, including medicinal plant surveys in the Tenggeresse village of Wonokitri Village, Tosari subdistrict, Pasuruan Regency [10]. Another ethnobotanical sur-vey was also previously reported in a different village, Ngadisari village, Sukapura dis-trict, Probolinggo Region [11]. Nevertheless, there is no comprehensive review on the phy-tochemical and pharmacological constituents of Tenggerese medicinal plants. In this re-view, we have collected the medicinal plants used by the Tenggerese community residing in the Wonokerso village, the oldest village in the Tenggerese community where the “Karo (blessing)” ceremony originated. The information regarding medicinal plants and their medicinal uses were collected through discussion and interviews with local physicians known as “dukuns”. The ethnopharmacological information was initiated in May 2015, and a list of dukuns medicinal plants was generated and are listed in Section 2 Table 1. Based on the list of plants in Table 1, we conducted a thorough literature search for each plant for their phytochemical and pharmacological activities. Figure 2 shows the sche-matic approach of this literature review. We have also consulted and compared the eth-nobotanical information of our survey with the published information described previ-ously from the surrounding villages. For example, Foeniculum vulgare and Acorus calamus, which were previously described as fever from the neighbouring villages, were also found in the current surveys described by dukuns [10–12].  In order to retrieve the phytochemical information of medicinal plants from Google Scholar (https://scholar.google.com/, accessed on 9 August 2022), PubMed (https://pub-med.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/, accessed on 9 August 2022) and Scifinder (https://scifinder.cas.org, accessed on 9 August 2022), we used keywords such as plant name, chemical constituent, phytochemical composition, and isolated compounds. Chem-ical names and molecular structures were authenticated using PubChem (https://pub-chem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/, accessed on 11 August 2022) and Chemspider (http://www.chemspider.com/, accessed on 11 August 2022). To collect pharmacological information, data were searched using the same databases, with the bioactivity of each Figure 1. Map of Indonesia. (A) Location of Tengger community within a Javanese island. (B) Bromomountain range where Tenggerese community live.There is no historical document to substantiate their influences, and there is a needfor such studies in Indonesia. There are a few reports on the ethnobotanical studies ofthe Tenggerese community, including medicinal plant surveys in the Tenggeresse villageof Wonokitri Village, Tosari subdistrict, Pasuruan Regency [10]. Another ethnobotanicalsurvey was also previously reported in a different village, Ngadisari village, Sukapuradistrict, Pr bolinggo Region [11]. Nevertheless, there is no comprehensive review on thephytochemical and pharmacological constituents of Tenggerese medicinal plants. In thisreview, we have collected the medicinal plants used by the T it si i gin t e onokerso vil age, the l est illage i e erese co unity here t e aro(blessi ) cere o originate . i f i i i l l t a theire ici l ses ere col ecte through discussio an intervie s ith local physiciansk as “dukuns”. ta a list of s i iase t e list of pla ts i able 1, we conducted a thorough literat re search for eachplant for their phytochemical and pharmacological activi es. Figure 2 shows the sc maticapproach of this literature review. We have also consulted and comp re the ethnobotanicali formation of our survey with the published information described previously from thesurrounding villages. For exampl , Foeniculum vulgare and Acorus calamus, which werepreviously described as fever from the neighbouring villages, were also found in the curre tsurveys described by dukuns [10–12]. In order to retrieve the phytochemical information ofmedicinal plants from Google Scholar (https://scholar.google.com/, accessed on 9 August2022), PubMed (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/, accessed on 9 August 2022) andScifinder (https://scifinder.cas.org, accessed on 9 August 2022), we used keywords such asplant name, chemical constituent, phytochemical composition, and isolated compounds.Chemical names and molecular structures were authenticated using PubChem (https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/, accessed on 11 August 2022) and Chemspider (http://www.chemspider.com/, accessed on 11 August 2022). To collect pharmacological information,data were searched using the same databases, with the bioactivity of each species collectedbased on Tenggerese traditional uses as part of the keywords. To maintain the quality ofinformation, we included only Scopus and PubMed indexed articles. We retrieved theMolecules 2022, 27, 7532 3 of 25literature from 1975 to 2022, conducted meta-analysis and presented it in a bar graph, asshown in Figure 3.Molecules 2022, 27, x FOR PEER REVIEW 3 of 27   species collected based on Tenggerese traditional uses as part of the keywords. To main-tain the quality of information, we included only Scopus and PubMed indexed articles. We retrieved the literature from 1975 to 2022, conducted meta-analysis and presented it in a bar graph, as shown in Figure 3.  Figure 2. Flow chart of our approach to scoping literature is presented here.  Figure 3. Retrieved articles related to phytochemistry and pharmacological studies of medicinal plants used by the Tenggeresse people. Papers were collected from a previous report (1975–2022) of the same plants studied across the globe for similar pharmacological claims (Google Scholar, PubMed, and SciFinder Scholar).   Figu e 2. Flow chart of our approach to scop ng litera ure is presented here.Molecules 2022, 27, x FOR PEER REVIEW 3 of 27   species c llected based on Tenggerese traditional uses as part of the keywords. To main-tain h  quality f information, we included only Scopus and PubMed indexed rticle . We retrieved the literature from 1975 to 2022, conducted meta-analysis and presented it in a bar graph, as shown in Figure 3.  Figure 2. Flow chart of our approach to scoping literature is presented here.  Figure 3. Retrieved articles related to phytochemistry and pharmacological studies of medicinal plants used by the Tenggeresse people. Papers were collected from a previous report (1975–2022) of the same plants studied across the globe for similar pharmacological claims (Google Scholar, PubMed, and SciFinder Scholar).   Figure 3. Retrieved articles related to phytochemistry and pharmacological studies of medicinalplants used by the Tenggeresse people. Papers were collected from a previous report (1975–2022) ofthe same plants studied across the globe for similar pharmacological claims (Google Scholar, PubMed,and SciFinder Scholar).2. Phytochemistry of Tenggerese Medicinal PlantsThe analysis of the reported ethnobotanical studies of Tenggerese medicinal plantsrevealed 41 species of medicinal plants (Table 1). Of these, 33 were studied for their phyto-Molecules 2022, 27, 7532 4 of 25chemical composition, and seven species remain unstudied. More than 404 phytochemicalswith diverse molecular structures were identified from the 33 medicinal plants studied (seeTable 1). These phytochemicals belong to different chemical classes including flavonoids,terpenoids, alkaloids, saponins and volatiles. While a few plants were reported to containtwo or three phytochemicals, other plants have been extensively studied, and as manyas 30 phytochemicals were either detected or isolated from a single plant. For example,ellagic acid was the only phytochemical reported from Rubus rosa, and therefore furtherin-depth analysis of this plant is required. On the other hand, 48 phytochemicals havebeen identified from Acorus calamus (Table 1). Seven species that were not studied for theirphytochemicals are Cayratia clemaidea, Drymocallis arguta, Elaeocarpus longifolius, Physalislagascae, Piper amplum, Rosa tomentosa and Tagetes tenuifolia (Figure 4).Molecules 2022, 27, x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 27   2. Phytochemistry of Tenggerese Medicinal Plants The analysis of the reported ethnobotanical studies of Tenggerese medicinal plants revealed 41 species of medicinal plants (Table 1). Of these, 33 were studied for their phy-tochemical composition, and seven species remain unstudied. More than 404 phytochem-icals with diverse molecular structures were identified from the 33 medicinal plants stud-ied (see Table 1). These phytochemicals belong to different chemical classes including fla-vonoids, terpenoids, alkaloids, saponins and volatiles. While a few plants were reported to contain two or three phytochemicals, other plants have been extensively studied, and as many as 30 phytochemicals were either detected or isolated from a single plant. For example, ellagic acid was the only phytochemical reported from Rubus rosa, and therefore further in-depth analysis of this plant is required. On the other hand, 48 phytochemicals have been identified from Acorus calamus (Table 1). Seven species that were not studied for their phytochemicals are Cayratia clemaidea, Drymocallis arguta, Elaeocarpus longifolius, Physalis lagascae, Piper amplum, Rosa tomentosa and Tagetes tenuifolia (Figure 4). It is interesting to note that although the medicinal plants listed in Table 1 have been used for many generations by the people of Tengger in Indonesia, this review found that most of the phytochemical and pharmacological studies on these plants were reported from other countries, including North and South Americas, Europe, Middle East and East Asia, and South East Asian countries. There are only limited phytochemical and pharma-cological studies reported on medicinal plants that grow in the Tengger region, or even Indonesia as a whole. The few medicinal plants that were extensively studied in Indonesia for their phytochemicals are C. burmanii, C. nucifera and S. grandiflora.   Figure 4. Pictures of understudied medicinal plants used by the Indigenous people of Tengger. (A): Cayratia clemaidea; (B): Drymocallis arguta: (C): Elaeocarpus longifolius; (D): Physalis lagascae; (E): Piper amplum, (F): Rosa tomentosa; (G): Tagetes tenuifolia.Figure 4. Pictures of understudied medicinal plants used by the Indigenous people of Tengger.(A): Cayratia clemaidea; (B): Drymocallis arguta: (C): Elaeocarpus longifolius; (D): Physalis lagascae;(E): Piper amplum, (F): Rosa tomentosa; (G): Tagetes tenuifolia.It is interesting to note that although the medicinal plants listed in Table 1 have beenused for many generations by the people of Tengger in Indonesia, this review found thatmost of the phytochemical and pharmacological studies on these plants were reported fromother countries, including North and South Americas, Europe, Middle East and East Asia,and South East Asian countries. There are only limited phytochemical and pharmacologicalstudies reported on medicinal plants that grow in the Tengger region, or even Indonesiaas a whole. The few medicinal plants that were extensively studied in Indonesia for theirphytochemicals are C. burmanii, C. nucifera and S. grandiflora.Molecules 2022, 27, 7532 5 of 25Table 1. Phytochemistry of Tenggerese medicinal plants collated from literature studies of similar species studied across the globe.Species FamilyTenggeresseEthnopharmacologicalUses of PlantsParts Used for ChemicalIsolationCountries (ChemicalStudies Reported) Isolated CompoundsAcorus calamusLinnaeus Acoraceae Fever Leaves, rhizome, stem Indiaβ-Asarone, Camphene, Cymene, Calarene, α-Selinene, s-Cadinol,Isoshyobunone, β-Sesquiphellandrene, Preiso-calamendiol, Acorone [13];(-)-4-Terpineol, Epieudesmin, Lysidine, (-)-Spathulenol, Borneol, Furylethyl ketone, Nonanoic acid, Bornyl acetate, Galgravin, Retusin, Butylbutanoate, Geranylacetate, Sakuranin, Acetic acid, Camphor, Isoelemicin,α-Ursolic acid, Acetophenone, Dehydroabietic acid, IsoeugenolMethylether, Apigenin, Dehydrodiisoeugenol, Linalool, Elemicin, Linolenicacid [14]; 2-Deca-4,7-dienol, Acoradin, Acoragermacrone, Acrenone,Aterpineol, β-Cadinene, Calacorene, Calamendiol, Galangin, Shyobunones,Sitosterol [15]; Calamusins A-I [16].Allium sativumLinnaeus Alliaceae Wound or cut Rhizome IraqE-Ajoene, Z-Ajoene, Alliin, Allicin, 2-Vinyl-4H-1,3-dithiin, Diallyl sulfide(DAS), Diallyl disulfide (DADS), Diallyl trisulfide (DATS), Allyl methylsulfide (AMS) [17].Alyxia reinwardtiiBlume ApocynaceaeFever,Rheumatism Stem ThailandCoumarin, 3-Hydroxycoumarin, 6-Hydroxycoumarin, 8-Hydroxycoumarin,Scopoletin, (+)-Pinoresinol, Zhebeiresinol and p-Hydroxybenzoic acid [18].Anredera cordifolia(Ten.) Steenis BasellaceaeItchiness,Wound Leaves BrazilPhytol, α-pinene, Larreagenin A, Vitexin, Isovitexin, Myricetin, Morin,Lupeol, β-Sitosterol, Ursolic acid [19].Apium graveolensLinnaeus Apiaceae Hypertension Leaves ChinaApigenin, Luteolin, Chlorogenic acid [20]; Linalool, D-Limonene,3-N-Butylphthalide (NBP) [21].Borreria laevis (Lam.)Griseb Rubiaceae Rheumatism Aerial parts ThailandBorreline, Asperulosidic acid, 6-O-Acetylscandoside,6α-Hydroxyadoxoside, Kaempferol 3-O-β-D-glucopyranoside, Kaempferol3-O-rutinoside, Quercetin 3-O-β-D-galactopyranoside, Rutin [22,23].Brassica rapaLinnaeus BrassicaceaeFever,Hypertension,NutritionLeaves, stem, flower buds,roots PortugalKaempferol 3-O-sophoroside-7-O-glucoside, Kaempferol 3-O(feruloyl/caffeoyl)-sophoroside7-O-glucoside, Isorhamnetin3,7-O-diglucoside, Isorhamnetin 3-O-glucoside [24].Capsicum pubescensDun. Solanaceae Tonic after hard labour Fruit MexicoCarotenoids (Violaxanthin, cis-Violaxanthin, Luteoxanthin, Antheraxanthin,Lutein, Zeaxanthin, β-Carotene), Ascorbic acid and Capsaicinoids(Capsaicin, Dihydrocapsaicin) [25].Cayratia clematidea (F.Müll.) Domin Vitaceae Stomach disorder NA NA NACinnamomumburmannii (Nees & T.Nees) Bl.Laruaceae Fever China, IndonesiaTrans-Cinnamaldehyde, Coumarin, and Trans-Cinnamic acid [26]. Styrene,Benzaldehyde, Camphene, β-Pinene, Borneol, α-Terpineol, Procyanidin B1,Procyanidin B2, Procyanidin trimer, Catechin, Procyanidin dimer,Epicatechin, Coumarin, (E)-Cinnamic acid, (E)-Cinnamaldehyde,(Z)-Cinnamaldehyde, Cinnamyl alcohol, (E)-cinnamaldehyde, eugenol,and coumarin, procyanidin trimer, (E)-cinnamaldehyde, and(Z)-cinnamaldehyde [27]. catechin, epicatechin, procyanidin B2, quercitrin,3,4-dihydroxybenzaldehyde, protocatechuic acid, and cinnamic acid [28].(E)-Cinnamaldehyde, Cinnamyl alcohol, Coumarin, 3,4-Dihydrocoumarin,Kaempferol, Procyanidin dimer, Procyanidin trimer, Linalool [29]Molecules 2022, 27, 7532 6 of 25Table 1. Cont.Species FamilyTenggeresseEthnopharmacologicalUses of PlantsParts Used for ChemicalIsolationCountries (ChemicalStudies Reported) Isolated CompoundsCocos nuciferaLinnaeus Aracaceae Foetus health Fruit India, Indonesia, Brazil, UK2-Furaldehyde diethyl acetal and Palmitic acid [30]; Jezonofol, Cirrhusin A,Cassigarol G, Maackin A, Treoguiacyl glycerol-8‘-vanil ether acid,Erythroguiacyl glycerol-8′-vanillic acid ether, Apigenin-7-O-β-D-glucoside,Piceatannol, p-Hydroxybenzoic acid, Protocatechuic acid, and Vanillic acid[31]; Two phenol compounds-catechin and Chlorogenic acid [32].Cuminum cyminumLinnaeus Apiaceae Fever Seed USA, IraqCuminaldehyde, α-Pinene, β-Pinene, γ-Cymene, γ-Terpinene,α-Terpinen-7-al and β-Terpinen-7-al [33]; Bergapten, Methoxsalen [34];Luteolin, Apigenin-7-O-glucoside [35].Curcuma longaLinnaeus ZingiberaceaeFever,Headache,WoundRhizome Thailand, China, Belgium,Vietnam, GermanyCurcuminoids, Demethoxycurcumin, Bisdemethoxycurcumin [36];Calebin-A [37]; α-Turmerone [38]; Epicatechins [39]; Cucurbitacin B,Curcumin [40]; Bisacurone B [41]; α-Curcumene, Zingiberene, Bisabolene,Sesquiphellandrene [42]; Turmeronol B, Turmeronol A, (E)-α-Atlantone[43]; Curlone [44].Datura metelLinnaeus Solanaceae Fever Leaves, Flower ChinaDaturafolisides, Daturametelin [45]; Dmetelisproside A, Citroside A,Staphylionoside D [46]; Baimantuoluolines, Baimantuoluoside [47];Cyclosieversioside F, Astragaloside II, Ginsenoside Rg1, Astrojanoside A,Celerioside E [48]; Isofraxidin, Scopatone, Daturadiol (3),1,4-Benzenediol,Arenarine D, Vanillin, N-trans-Feruloyl-tyramine, Scopoletin, G-Sitosteroland Hyoscyamilactol [49].Daucus carota Apiaceae Eyesight Roots, Stems, Flower Italy, Koreaβ-carotene, carotenoids [50]; β-Phellandrene, γ-Terpinene [51];6-methoxymellein [52]; Camphorene, Carotol, β-Bisabolene, Isoelemicin[53].Drymocallis argutasubsp. arguta RosaceaeDiarrhoeaAnaemia NA NA NAElaeocarpuslongifolius Bl. Elaeocarpaceae NA NA NAMolecules 2022, 27, 7532 7 of 25Table 1. Cont.Species FamilyTenggeresseEthnopharmacologicalUses of PlantsParts Used for ChemicalIsolationCountries(Chemical StudiesReported)Isolated CompoundsErythrina variegataLinnaeus Leguminoseae Diarrhoea Whole plant ChinaXanthoxyletin [54]; eryvarinols A and B [55]; Protocatechuic acid, Chlorogenic acid, andCaffeic acid [56]; Erythrinin B [57].Foeniculum vulgare Apiaceae Fever,Rheumatism Leaves, StemSerbia, Italy, TunisiaTurkey, Romania,China, India, Italy,Turkey, Algeria,Italy, Spain,Turkey, and EgyptQuercetin 3-glucuronide, Isoquercitrin, Rutin, Quercetin 3-arabinoside, Isorhammetinglycosides [58]; Dillapiol, Bergapten, Imperatorin, Psolaren [59]; Anethole, Limonene[60]; Gallic acid, Diosmin, Hesperidin, Kaempferol [61]; Carvacrol, Thymol, Anethol,p-Cymene and γ-Terpinene [62]; (E)-Anethole and p-Acetonylanisole [63]. α-Thujene,1,8-Cineol, β-Ocimene, Linalool, Germacrene D, Anisketone, Apiol, n-Hexadecanoicacid, Cubebene, Benzene-1-methyl-4-(1-methylethyl)-p-cymene, 1,3,6-Octatriene,3,7-dimethyl-, (E)-3-carene, 2-Heptene, 3-Methyl-butanal, β-Pinene, Camphene,Hexanal, α-Pinene, β-Phellandrene, α-Phellanrrene, β-Myrcene, 4-Carene, 2-Heptanohe,Limonene, 4-Methyl-bicyclo[3.1.0]hex-2-ene, Eucalyptol, α-Pinene, γ-Terpinene,7-Dimethyl-1,3,7-octriene, 2,4-Dimethyl-benzenamine, 3-Carene, Cathine, 2-Heptanol,2-Propyn-1-ol, 2,6-Dimethyl-2,4,6-octatriene, Fenchone,1-Methyl-4-(1-methylethyl)-benzene, cis-Limonene oxide, trans-Limonene oxide,6-Methylene-bicyclo[3.1.0]hexane, Sabinene hydrate, Fenchyl acetate, Camphor,Benzaldehyde, 1,3-Butanediol, Dicyclopropyl carbinol, Fenchol, 1-Octanol,5-Methyl-2-heptanol, Tetradecyl-oxirane, Estragole, Trans-p-2,8-menthadien-1-ol,β-Terpinol, cis-p-2,8-Menthadien, 4-Methyl-1-(methylethyl)-3-cyclohexen,2-Methyl-5-(1-methylethyl)-2-cyclohexen-1-one, Phenylmethyl-formic ester,2,3-Cyclohexen-1-methanol, Epi-bicyclosesquiphellardrene, cis-p-Menth-2,8-dienol,1,4-Dimethoxy-benzene, 1-Methoxy-4-(1-propenyl)-benzene,1,2,4a,5,8,8a-Hexadehyde-naphthalene, 4-Methyl-bicyclo[3.1.1]hept-3-en-2-ol,trans-Anethole 73.20 73.27 66.71, Allantoic acid, 2-Methyl-5-(1-methylethyl)-phenol,Mannoheptulose, 2-Methyl-5-(1-methylethyl)-2-cyclohexen-1-ol, 1-Undecanol,Benzothiazole, E-Pinane, 2-Cyclohexen-1-ol, 2-Methyl-bezenemethanol,4-Methoxy-benzaldehyde, 1,6-Hexanediol, 2-Methoxycyclohexanone, β-Elemenone,Mephenesin, 4ϕ-Methoxy-acetophenone, 2-Methyl-3-methylethyl-butanoic acid, Folicacid, 1-(Methoxyphenyl)-2-propanone, 1-Methyl-3-(1-methylethyl)-benzene,4-Fluorohistamine, 1,2-Dimethoxy-4-(1-propenyl)-benzene,(E)-2-Hydroxy-4-cyano-stilbene, 1-(3-Methoxyphenyl)-1-propanone [12],eriodictyol-7-rutinoside, quercetin-3-rutinoside, and rosmarinic acid [64],quercetin-3-glucuronide, isoquercitrin, quercetin-3-arabinoside,kaempferol-3-glucuronide and kaempferol-3-arabinoside, and isorhamnetin glucoside[58], Quercetin-3-O-galactoside, kaempferol-3-O-rutinoside, andkaempferol-3-O-glucoside [65],Isorhamnetin 3-O-α-rhamnoside, quercetin, andkaempferol, quercetin 3-O-rutinoside, kaempferol 3-O-rutinoside, and quercetin3-O-β-glucoside [66], quercetin, rutin, isoquercitrin [67], 3-O-caffeoylquinic acid,4-O-caffeoylquinic acid, 5-Ocaffeoylquinic acid, 1,3-O-di-caffeoylquinic acid,1,4-O-dicaffeoylquinic acid, and 1,5-O-di-caffeoylquinic acid [64],3,4-dihydroxyphenethylalchohol-6-O-caffeoyl-β-Dglucopyranoside and3′,8′-binaringenin [68].Molecules 2022, 27, 7532 8 of 25Table 1. Cont.Species FamilyTenggeresseEthnopharmacologicalUses of PlantsParts Used for ChemicalIsolationCountries (Chemical StudiesReported) Isolated CompoundsGarcinia mangostanaLinnaeus Clusiaceae Stomach disorder Fruit Indiaα-Mangostin, β-Mangostin, γ-Mangostin, Garcinone-E,Methoxy-β-mangostin, Xanthone [69]; Mangostin, BR-Xanthone,Gartanin, 8-Desoxygartanin, Garcinone-D, Euxanthone, Xanthione [70];Epichatechin, and Tannin [71].Jatropha gossypiifoliaLinnaeus Euphorbiaceae Rheumatism Whole plant, Stem, Leaves India, Nigeria, ThailandGossypifan, Gossypilin, Gossypidien [72]; Gadain, Jatroiden [73];Jatrodien [74]; Arylnaphthalene, Galic, Vanilic, Syringic, 2,5-Dihydroxybenzoic, Caffeic, Rosmarinic, and p-Coumaric [75].Kaempferia galangaLinnaeus Zingiberaceae Rheumatism Rhizome Thailand(−)-Sandaracopimaradiene, Boesenberol,Sandaracopimaradien-1α,9α-diol, Kaempulchraol C, Kaempulchraol D[76].Malus prunifolia(Willd.) Borkh. Rosaceae Diarrhoea Fruit ChinaCitric acid, p-Coumaric acid, Hyperoside, Myricetin, Naringenin,Quercetin, Kaempferol, Gentiopicroside, Ursolic acid, and 8-Epiloganicacid [77].Manihot esculentaCrantz Euphorbiaceae Hypertension Stem Switzerland, ChinaSporoge, Thecacorin, Longifoamide-B (Zeng Y, 2015); Yucalexin P-23,Yucalexin P-15, Protocatechuic acid, and Catalpinic acid [78];Coniferaldehyde, Isovanillin, 6-Deoxyjacareubin, Scopoletin,Syringaldehyde, Pinoresinol, p-Coumaric acid, Ficusol, Balanophoninand Ethamivan [79].Musa paradisiacaLinnaeus MusaceaeDiarrhoeaStomach disorder Fruit Brazil, IndiaCycloeucalenone, 31-Norcyclolaudenone, 24-Methylene-cicloartanol[80]; α-Thujene, γ-Terpinene, α- and β-Pinene, Sabinene, β-Myrcene,Limonene, α-Capaene, Caryophyllene and (Z,E)-α Farnesene,Aceteugenol, Palmitic acid, Stearic acid, Palmitin, and Stearin [81].Oryza sativaLinnaeus Poaceae Vitaliser Seed, Roots Japan, KoreaMomilactones A and B [82]; Momilactone D, Momilactone E,Momilactone A, Sandaracopimaradien-3-one, Oryzalexin A [83];Oryzativol C [84]; Oryzativol A [85]; ferulic acid, γ-Oryzanol, andPhytic acid [86]; Vanillin, Methyl trans-ferulate, Trans-p-Coumaric acidMethyl ester, N-Benzoyltryptamine, andN-(Trans-cinnamoyl)tryptamine [87].Persea americana Mill. Lauraceae Hypertension Seed Brazil Quercetin and Epicatechin [88]; Avocadene, Avocadyne, Avocadenol-A[89]; γ-Lactone Perseanolide [90].Physalis lagascaeRoem. & Schult. SolanaceaeDiarrhoeaStomach disorder NA NA NAPiper amplum Kunth Piperaceae Rheumatism NA NA NAMolecules 2022, 27, 7532 9 of 25Table 1. Cont.Species FamilyTenggeresseEthnopharmacologicalUses of PlantsParts Used for ChemicalIsolationCountries (Chemical StudiesReported) Isolated CompoundsPiper betle Linnaeus Piperaceae Bleeding Leaves India, Myanmar, ChinaEstragole, Linalool, α-Copaene, Anethole, Caryophyllene, α-Terpinene,p-Cymene, 1,8-Cineole, β-Caryophyllene, α-Humulene, Allylpyrocatechol, Allylcatechol, Methyl eugenol, Estragol (methylchavicol), Chavibetol, Chavibetol acetate, Safrol,4-Allyl-2-methoxy-phenolacetate, and 3-Allyl-6-methoxyphenol [91];Pipeneolignan A, Piperneolignan B, Hydroxychavicol,p-Hydroxycinnamaldehyde, Diallylcatechol [92]; Pipercerebrosides Aand B [93]; Piperolactam A [94].Rosa tomentosa Sm. Rosaceae Fever NA NA NARubus rosa L. H.Bailey Rosaceae Diarrhoea Whole plant USA Elagic acid [95].Saccharumofficinarum Linnaeus Poaceae Rheumatism Stem BrazilPhenolic acid: p-Hydroxybenzoic, p-Hydroxycinnamic, Vanillic andFerulic acid, Terpenoids: α-Tocopherol and β-Carotene, Flavonoidaglycone Tricin (5,7,4-trihydroxy-3,5-dimethoxyflavone) [96].Sechium edule Cucurbitaceae Fever (kindern) Whole plant, Fruit Mexico Cinnamic acid, Linoleic, Palmitic, and Myristic acids [97].Sesbania grandiflora(L.)Pers. Fabaceae Fever Leaves, Bark, Flowers IndonesiaGallic acid [98], 2-Arylbenzofuran [99]; Sesbagrandiflorains A and B[100]; Sesbagrandiflorain D and E, Spinosan A and Spinosan B [101].Solanum lycopersicumLinnaeus Solanaceae Nutrition Fruit USA, Japan, Korea, ChileMonoterpenes, Glycoalkaloids, and Acyl sugars [102];13-Oxo-9(Z),11(E),15(Z)-octadecatrienoic acid (13-oxo-OTA), a linolenicacid derivative [103]; Steroidal saponins, Alkaloids, Cerebroside,Phenolic compounds, Sterols, and Nucleosides [104]; Guanosine [105].Solanum nigrumLinnaeus SolanaceaeHypertension,Tonic drink after hardlabourWhole plant, Fruit, Seed China, KoreaLignanamides [106]; Solanine A, 7α-OH Khasianine, 7α-OHSolamargine and 7α-OH Solasonine [107]; Saponins, Solanigroside Aand Solanigroside B [108]; Steroidal glycosides (β2-Solamargine,Solamargine, and Degalactotigonin), Saponin (degalactotigonin) [108];Lunasin [109].Tagetes tenuifoliaCavanille Asteraceae Nasal bleeding NA NA NATamarindus indicaLinnaeus Fabaceae Nausea Fruit India9,12-Octadecadienoic acid (Z,Z)-, Cis-vaccenic acid, n-Hexadecanoicacid, Beta-Sitosterol, and Octadecanoic acid [110]; Proanthcyanidins,(+)-Catechin, Procyanidin B2, (-)-Epicatechin, Procyanidin trimer,Procyanidin tetramer, Procyanidin pentamer, Procyanidin hexamer,Taxifolin, Apigenin, Eriodictyol, Luteolin and Naringenin [111].Zingiber officinaleRoscoe Zingiberaceae Headache Rhizome Japan, ThailandMyristicin, Plumbagin, Methyl piperate, 6-Shogaol, 6-Gingerol andPiperine [112]; Geranyl6-O-α-L-arabinopyranosyl-β-D-glucopyranoside, Geranyl6-O-β-D-apiofuranosyl-β-D-glucopyranoside, and Geranyl6-O-β-D-xylopyranosyl-β-D-glucopyranoside [113].NA: Not available.Molecules 2022, 27, 7532 10 of 253. Biological Activities of Tenggerese Medicinal PlantsTo provide a scientific basis to the traditionally claimed therapeutic indications ofmedicinal plants, it is critical to test the plants for their chemical and biological activities.This is often a challenging task for the traditional practitioners and researchers in Indonesiadue to lack of expertise, technology and financial resources. However, since there aremany overlapping medicinal plants between different cultures and countries, it is likelythat some medicinal plants may have been studied previously. For example, a capsicumspecies which are used by Tengger people in alleviating post labour complication caused byinflammation [114] has been shown to possess antioxidant and anti-inflammatory activities.In these cases, in order to understand the scientific status of medicinal plants used byTengger healers, a literature review on each of the plants listed in Table 1 was undertakenfor their biological activities. Several medicinal plants have been studied for their biologicalactivities including diarrhoea, wound healing, headache, rheumatism, hypertension, fever,and other disorders. We have discussed them separately.3.1. DiarrhoeaMany medicinal plants were traditionally used for treating diarrhoea, e.g., the sapof Musa paradisiaca L. This plant was reported to possess anti-diarrheal activity in ananimal model study [115]. The soluble plantain fibre of banana was also reported toprevent diarrhoea by blocking epithelial adhesion and M-cell translocation of intestinalpathogens [116]. A clinical study on children with acute watery diarrhoea who receivedgreen cooked banana supplement indicated a significant recovery of their health [117].The dietary management of persistent diarrhea in hospitalized children showed that thegreen banana diet significantly shortened the duration of diarrhea by 18 h compared to thenon-banana-supplemented group [118].3.2. Wound HealingOf the many plants used by the Tenggerese healers for treating wounds, an in vivo preclinicalexperiment of leaf extract of Anredera cordifolia in skin burn recovery using albino rats showed a bet-ter healing process [119]. This might be related to the antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, and antibacte-rial properties of the plant. Similarly, a rhizome of Curcuma longa is prepared traditionally in woundhealing by the Tenggeresse healers. Its rhizome is rich in curcumin 1, which has been reported forits wound healing, anti-inflammatory, anti-infectious, antibacterial and antioxidant activities [120].In addition, curcumin 1 advances cutaneous wound healing through tissue remodelling,granulation, tissue formation, collagen deposition and epithelial regeneration, and in-creases fibroblast proliferation and vascular density [120]. The bulb of Allium sativum (garlic)poultice was applied in wound healing which is rich in allin 2, cycloalliin 3, S-allyl-L-cysteine 4,S-methyl-L-cysteine 5, S-ethylcysteine 6, S-1-proponyl-L-cysteine 7, S-allylmercapto-L-cysteine 8,fructosyl-arginine 9, and β-chlorogenin 10. It also consists of L-arginine 11, L-cysteine 12, andL-methionine 13 (Figure 5) [121]. These compounds were tested to have wound healingactivity. Dermatologic application of garlic is correlated with its antioxidant components(S-allyl-L-cysteine 4 and S-allylmercapto-L-cysteine 8), which are organosulfur compounds.In addition, a randomized placebo-controlled double-blinded study on garlic powderrevealed the powder increases capillary skin perfusions after 5 h administrations. Thepre-clinical trial of aged garlic extract on chicken skin wounds indicated an increase in there-epithelialization and profuse dose-dependent neovascularization [122].Molecules 2022, 27, 7532 11 of 25olecules 2022, 27, x FOR PEER REVIEW 12 f 27    Figure 5. Wound healing compounds of medicinal plants used by Tenggerese (isolated from the same species found in other countries). 3.3. Headache Zingiber officinale and Curcuma longa, which are frequently used in Tengger for the treatment of headache, possess several important pharmacological properties including analgesic and neuroprotective properties. A case report of a 42 year old patient with mi-graine/headache showed that they experienced a reduction in migraine attacks with much lower intensity after consuming ginger powder and using raw fresh ginger in their diet [123]. However, a double-blind placebo-controlled randomized clinical trial of Z. officinale revealed that the consumption of ginger did not have a substantial effect on migraine treatment. Nevertheless, the trial indicated significant activity in attenuating pain inten-sity [124]. This pain alleviating was associated with the modulatory effect of the trigeminal nociceptor in neurogenic inflammation, and also had neuroprotective effects by inhibition of the production of interleukin 6 (IL-6) and tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α). 6-Gin-gerol 14 and 6-shogaol 15 (Figure 6) are the main chemical constituents of ginger [125]. Furthermore, a multimodal care for headache, which include C. longa as a management therapy, appeared to improve the patient’s symptoms. The tension score of the headache was 3 out of 10 (0 being no pain and 10 being highest pain) in the first week of treatment, with no migraine experienced after that [126]. Curcumin 1 could significantly reduce the neurochemical changes and nerve fibre degeneration [127]. In addition, curcumin 1 (iso-lated from C. longa) and capsaicin analog [6]-gingerol 14 (isolated from Z. officinale) were reported to possess significant analgesic activities [128,129]. These two plants are com-monly used as cooking spices in many parts of the world. i re 5. Wound healing compounds of medicinal plants used by Tengg rese (isolated from the samespecie found in other countries).3.3. HeadacheZingiber officinale and Curcuma longa, which are frequently used in Tengger for thetreatment of headache, possess several important pharmacological properties includinganalgesic and neuroprotective properties. A case report of a 42 year old patient withmigraine/headache showed that they experienced a reduction in migraine attacks withmuch lower intensity after consuming ginger powder and using raw fresh ginger intheir diet [123]. However, a double-blind placebo-controlled randomized clinical trial ofZ. officinale revealed that the consumption of ginger did not have a substantial effect onmigraine treatment. Nevertheless, the trial indicated significant activity in attenuatingpain intensity [124]. This pain alleviating was associated with the modulatory effect of thetrigeminal nociceptor in neurogenic inflammation, and also had neuroprotective effects byinhibition of the production of interleukin 6 (IL-6) and tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α).6-Gingerol 14 and 6-shogaol 15 (Figure 6) are the main chemical constituents of ginger [125].Furthermore, a multimodal care for headache, which include C. longa as a managementtherapy, appeared to improve the patient’s symptoms. The tension score of the headachewas 3 out of 10 (0 being no pain and 10 being highest pain) in the first week of treatment,with no migraine experienced after that [126]. Curcumin 1 could significantly reducethe neurochemical changes and nerve fibre degeneration [127]. In addition, curcumin 1(isolated from C. longa) and capsaicin analog [6]-gingerol 14 (isolated from Z. officinale)were reported to possess significant analgesic activities [128,129]. These two plants arecommonly used as cooking spices in many parts of the world.Molecules 2022, 27, 7532 12 of 25olecules 2022, 27, x FOR PEER REVIEW 13  7    Figure 6. Analgesic compounds of medicinal plants used by Tenggerese (isolated from same species found in other countries). 3.4. Rheumatism and Anti-Inflammatory Agents Seven medicinal plants prescribed by the Tenggerese healers to treat rheumatism are Alyxia reinwardtii, Borreria laevis, Foeniculum vulgare, Jatropha gossypiifolia, Kaempferia ga-langa, Saccharum officinarum, and Piper amplumi. Most are prepared as an ointment, juiced, or boiled to drink. Previous studies related to the pharmacological activities of F. vulgare, J. gossypiifolia, K. galanga, and S. officinarum supported the traditional claims of these plants as anti-rheumatoid. Locally known as “adas” in Tengger, the leaf of F. vulgare consists of monoterpene hydrocarbon and sesquiterpenes as the main components of their essential oils. The methanol extract of F. vulgare Mill. showed inhibitory effects against acute and subacute inflammatory diseases and possessed a central analgesic effect, validating its traditional use for arthritis [130]. An in vivo preclinical study of F. vulgare essential oils against the mouse ear edema model induced by TPA were reported to reduce the level of anti-inflammatory cytokines TNF-α, cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), IL-6, and p65 [131]. Ad-ditionally, a randomized double-blind trial of women with knee osteoarthritis showed that the extract capsule of F. vulgare significantly lowered the scores for pain, disability, total of WOMAC score and VAS variables [132]. In addition, the insignificant toxicity of F. vulgare infusion was reported based on an in vivo experiment using rats [133]. The plant K. galanga is used traditionally in rheumatism, and has been reported to possess significant anti-inflammatory activity in carrageenan-induced rats by limiting lipoxygenase (LOX), thereby suppressing the leukotriene B4 (LTB4) production [134]. Ethyl-trans-p-methoxycinnamate (EPMC) 16 is a dominant phytoconstituent in K. galanga. It showed significant anti-inflammatory activity with a minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) of 100 mg/kg in a carrageenan-induced edema, and also showed non-selective in-hibition activities of cyclooxygenases 1 and 2, with IC50 values of 1.12 μM and 0.83 μM, respectively [135]. EPMC rich extract suppress acute and chronic inflammation progres-sion in animal models through neutrophil infiltration inhibition [136]. In another recent study, EPMC was also reported to have potential activity to inhibit granuloma tissue for-mation and suppress cytokine production including IL-1 and TNF-α. The significant an-algesic effect of EPMC was also shown in a tail flick experiment of rodents [137]. The herbal gel containing an aqueous extract of J. gossypiifolia was reported to have topical anti-inflammatory activity, either in acute or chronic models of inflammation. It also reduced the production of nitric oxide, leukocyte migration and inhibited edema for-mation. The flavonoids constituents may be hypothesized as the main active compounds in J. gossypiifolia [138]. In zymosan-induced arthritis mice, a mixture of fatty acids from S. officinarum wax oil (FAM) was reported to decrease the level of β-glucuronidase activity in the synovial fluid of treated mice. FAM also reduces bone erosion [139]. S. officinarum, K. galanga, and F. vulgare, which are used for treating rheumatism pain, have been re-ported to possess significant anti-inflammatory and analgesic properties when evaluated using a carrageenin-induced test, a hot plate and acetic acid-induced writhing tests [140]. Eight phenolic compounds that were isolated from A.reinwardtii Bl (coumarin 17, 3-hy-droxycoumarin 18, 6-hydroxycoumarin 19, 8-hydroxycoumarin 20, scopoletin 21, (+)-pi-noresinol 22, zhebeiresinol 23, and p-hydroxybenzoic acid 24) showed anti-inflammatory activities [18] (Figure 7). Brassica rapa [141] and A. reinwardtii [142] were reported to have anti-inflammatory, gastroprotective and antiulcer properties against indomethacin and aspirin-induced rats. In addition, Brassicaceae is composed of an anti-inflammatory agent Figure 6. nalgesic co pounds of edicinal plants used by Tenggerese (isolated fro sa e speciesfound in other countries).. . i i fl t r e tsi i l l t i t r s l r t t t tilyxia reinwardtii, Borreria laevis, Foeniculum vulgare, Jatropha gossypiifolia, Kaempferia galan a,Saccharum officinarum, and Piper amplu i. Most are prepared as an oi tment, juiced, orboiled to drink. Previous studies related to the pharmacological activities of F. vulgare,J. gossypiifolia, K. galanga, and S. officinaru supported the traditional clai s of these plantsas anti-rheu atoid. Locally kno n as “adas” in Tengger, the leaf of F. vulgare consists ofonoterpene hydrocarbon and sesquiterpenes as the ain co ponents of their essentialoils. The methanol extract of F. vulgare ill. showed inhibitory effects against acute andsubacute inflammatory diseases and possessed a central analgesic effect, validating itstraditional use for arthritis [130]. An in vivo preclinical study of F. vulgare essential oilsagainst the mouse ear edema model induced by TPA were reported to reduce the levelof anti-inflammatory cytokines TNF-α, cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), IL-6, and p65 [131].Additionally, a randomized double-blind trial of women with knee osteoarthritis showedthat the extract capsule of F. vulgare significantly lowered the scores for pain, disability,total of WOMAC score and VAS variables [132]. In addition, the insignificant toxicity ofF. vulgare infusion was reported based on an in vivo experiment using rats [133].The plant K. galanga is used traditionally in rheumatism, and has been reported topossess significant anti-inflammatory activity in carrageenan-induced rats by limitinglipoxygenase (LOX), thereby suppressing the leukotriene B4 (LTB4) production [134]. Ethyl-trans-p-methoxycinnamate (EPMC) 16 is a dominant phytoconstituent in K. galanga. Itshowed significant anti-inflammatory activity with a minimum inhibitory concentration(MIC) of 100 mg/kg in a carrageenan-induced edema, and also showed non-selectiveinhibition activities of cyclooxygenases 1 and 2, with IC50 values of 1.12 µM and 0.83 µM,respectively [135]. EPMC rich extract suppress acute and chronic inflammation progressionin animal models through neutrophil infiltration inhibition [136]. In another recent study,EPMC was also reported to have potential activity to inhibit granuloma tissue formationand suppress cytokine production including IL-1 and TNF-α. The significant analgesiceffect of EPMC was also shown in a tail flick experiment of rodents [137].The herbal gel containing an aqueous extract of J. gossypiifolia was reported to havetopical anti-inflammatory activity, either in acute or chronic models of inflammation. Italso reduced the production of nitric oxide, leukocyte migration and inhibited edemaformation. The flavonoids constituents may be hypothesized as the main active com-pounds in J. gossypiifolia [138]. In zymosan-induced arthritis mice, a mixture of fatty acidsfrom S. officinarum wax oil (FAM) was reported to decrease the level of β-glucuronidaseactivity in the synovial fluid of treated mice. FAM also reduces bone erosion [139].S. officinarum, K. galanga, and F. vulgare, which are used for treating rheumatism pain,have been reported to possess significant anti-inflammatory and analgesic propertieswhen evaluated using a carragee in-induced test, a hot plate and acetic acid-inducewrithing tests [140]. Eight phenolic compou s that were isolated from A.reinwardtiiBl (coumarin 17, 3-hydroxycoumarin 18, 6-hydroxycoumarin 19, 8-hydroxycoumarin 20,scopoletin 21, (+)-pinoresin l 22, zhebeiresinol 23, and p-hydroxybenzoic acid 24) showedanti-inflammatory activities [18] (Figure 7). Brassica rapa [141] and A. reinwardtii [142]were reported to hav anti-inflammatory, gastroprot ctive and antiulc p o e ies againstindomethacin and aspirin-indu ed rats. In addition, Brassicaceae s comp sed of a anti-Molecules 2022, 27, 7532 13 of 25inflammatory agent producing veggie species such as B. oleracea, which significantly inhibitsoxidative/nitrosative stress and lipoperoxidation, based on an ex vivo experiment [143].olecules 2022, 27, x FOR PEER REVIEW 14 f 27   producing veggie species such as B. oleracea, which significantly inhibits oxidative/nitrosa-tive stress and lipoperoxidation, based on an ex vivo experiment [143].  Figure 7. Compounds found in plants used by Tenggerese (isolated from same species found in other countries).  3.5. Hypertension High blood pressure was habitually treated by Tenggerese using Apium graveolens, Brassica rapa, Manihot esculenta, Persera americana, and Solanum nigrum. The hexane, meth-anol, and aqueous ethanol extracts of A. graveolens seed was reported to reduce blood pressure in deoxycorticosterone acetate–induced hypertensive rats. Further studies re-vealed that N-butylphthalide 25 presented as the major constituent of the hexane extracts of A. graveolens, which might be responsible for lowering blood pressure activity. Apig-enin 26 isolated from A. graveolens demonstrated anti-hypertensive effects in rats [144]. In addition, a randomized triple-blind, placebo-controlled, cross-over clinical trial of A. grav-eolens was reported to have beneficial effects in metabolic syndrome, including hyperten-sion. Administration of A. graveolens extract could also alter the pharmacokinetic profile of oral anti-hypertensive drugs when given in combination, thereby enhancing their effi-cacy [145]. The oil of P. americana, commonly known as avocado, was also reported to decrease diastolic and systolic blood pressure by 21.2% and 15.5%, respectively. Besides its beneficial effect on hypertension, avocado oil was reported to suppress the reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels responsible for the pathogenesis of Angiotensin-II induced hypertension [146]. The aqueous extract of P. americana leaf showed a significant reduction in systolic blood pressure (SBP), diastolic blood pressure (DBP), and mean arterial pressure (MAP), but had no beneficial effect on heart rate [147]. The crude extracts of other hypotensive medicinal plants such as B. rapa and M. esculenta inhibited angiotensin I-converting en-zyme (ACE) [148]. The dual inhibition of ACE and renin are known to be more effective in lowering blood pressure. A protein-derived glycinyl-histidinyl-serine (GHS) 27 (iden-tified from B. rapa) has been known to exhibit dual anti-hypertensive effects [149]. A. i re . s found in plants used by Ten gerese (isolated from same species found inother countries).. . erte sioigh blood pressure was habitually treated by Tenggerese using Apium graveolens, Bras-sica rapa, Manihot esculenta, Persera americana, and Solanum nigrum. The hexane, methanol,and aqueous ethanol extracts of A. graveolens seed was reported to reduce blood pressurein deoxycorticosterone acetate–induced hypertensive rats. Further studies revealed that N-butylphthalide 25 presented as the major constituent of the hexane extracts of A. graveolens,which might be responsible for lowering blood pressure activity. Apigenin 26 isolated fromA. graveolens demonstrated anti-hypertensive effects in rats [144]. In addition, a randomizedtriple-blind, placebo-controlled, cross-over clinical trial of A. graveolens was reported tohave beneficial effects in metabolic syndrome, including hypertension. Administration ofA. graveolens extract could also alter the pharmacokinetic profile of oral anti-hypertensivedrugs when given in combination, thereby enhancing their efficacy [145]. The oil of P. amer-icana, commonly known as avocado, was also reported to decrease diastolic and systolicblood pressure by 21.2% and 15.5%, respectively. Besides its beneficial effect on hyper-tension, avocado oil was reported to suppress the reactive oxygen species (ROS) levelsresponsible for the pathogenesis of Angiotensin-II induced hypertension [146].The aqueous extract of P. americana leaf showed a significant reduction in systolicblood pressure (SBP), diastolic blood pressure (DBP), and mean arterial pressure (MAP),but had no beneficial effect on heart rate [147]. The crude extracts of other hypotensivemedicinal plants such as B. rapa and M. esculenta inhibited angiotensin I-converting enzyme(ACE) [148]. The dual inhibition of ACE and renin are known to be more effective inlowering blood pressure. A protein-derived glycinyl-histidinyl-serine (GHS) 27 (identifiedfrom B. rapa) has been known to exhibit dual anti-hypertensive effects [149]. A. graveolensextract from which junipediol A 8-O-β-D-glucoside (1-β-D-glucosyloxy-2-(3-methoxy-4-Molecules 2022, 27, 7532 14 of 25hydroxyphenyl)propane-1,3-diol 28 was isolated also inhibited the angiotensin-convertingenzyme (ACE) [150] (Figure 8).Molecules 2022, 27, x FOR PEER REVIEW 15 of 27   graveolens extract from which junipediol A 8-O-β-D-glucoside (1-β-D-glucosyloxy-2-(3-meth xy-4-hydroxyphenyl)propane-1,3-diol 28 was isolated also inhibit d the a gioten-sin-converting enzyme (ACE) [150] (Figure 8).  Figure 8. Antihypertensive compounds of plants used by Tenggerese (isolated from same species reported from other countries). 3.6. Antimicrobial Activities Some Tenggerese medicinal plants were reported to have potential antimicrobial properties against various strains. For example, Acorus calamus extract, used by Ten-gerrese traditional healers (dukuns) for treating fever, showed broad-spectrum bioactivi-ties including inhibition of both gram negative and positive bacteria such as Helicobacter pylori [151], Propinibacterium acnes [152], Methycillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) [153], Enterobacter aaerogenes, Proteus mirabilis [154] multidrug-resistant enteric bacteria [155], and dengue virus (DENV) replication. In addition, A. calamus. was reported to con-tain antimicrobial compounds including β-asarone 29, eugenol 30, methyl isoeugenol 31, pinenes 32, myrcene 33, cymene 34 [156] and tatanan A [157]. (E)-Cinnamaldehyde 35, procyanidin B2 36 and (+)-catechin 37 isolated from Cinnamomum burmannii (Nees & T. Nees) Bl. showed antimicrobial activity [158]. Cuminaldehyde 38, β-pinene 39, and γ-ter-pinene 40 (Figure 9) isolated from Cuminum cyiminum seeds (locally known as ‘jinten’) showed antibacterial activities against Bacillus cereus, Staphylococcus aureus, and Escherichia coli. The oil from the seed of this plant increases membrane permeability leading to swell-ing, and the reduction of membrane function, thereby changing cell morphology and causing cell death [159]. Sechium edule was reported to possess antifungal activity against Candida spp and Aspergillus spp [160]. D. metel showed antifungal activity against Asper-gillus flavus, Microsporum canis, and Fusarium solani [161]. In addition, daturalone 41 iso-lated from Datura metel was reported to be effective against Klebsiella pneumoniae, Bacillus subtilis, Staphylococcus epidermis, and Staphylococcus aureus [161]. C. burmanii extract, which contains E-cinnamaldehyde 35 and several polyphenols as a predominant volatile oil component, showed antimicrobial activities against B. cereus, Listeria monocytogenes, S. aureus Escherichia coli, and Salmonella anatum [158]. Crude polar extracts (n-butane and ethanol) from C. burmanii were reported to be effective against Lis-teria monocytogenes, Staphylococcus aureus, Escherichia coli O157:H7, and Salmonella anatum with the inhibition zone ranging from 7.28–24.32 mm in which n-butane extract indicated higher activity [27,29]. Curcuma longa, which contains curcumin, demonstrated a wide-spectrum of antimicrobial properties against Vibrio harveyi, Vibrio alginolyticus, Vibrio vul-nificus, Vibrio parahaemolyticus, Vibrio cholerae, Bacillus subtilis, Bacillus cereus, Aeromonas hy-drophila, Streptococcus agalactiae, Staphylococcus aureus, Staphylococcus intermedius, Staphylo-coccus epidermidis, and Edwardsiella tarda. Figure 8. ntihypertensive co pounds of plants used by Tenggerese (isolated fro sa e speciesreported from other countries).. . i i i l i i iTenggerese medicinal plants were ported to have potential antimicrobial prop-erties against various strains. For example, Acorus calamus extract, used by Tengerr setraditional healers (dukuns) for treating fever, showed broad-spectrum bioactivities includ-ing inhibition of both gram negative and positive bacteria such as Helicobacter pylori [151],Propinibacterium acnes [152], Methycillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) [153], En-terobacter aaerogenes, Proteus mirabilis [154] multidrug-resistant enteric bacteria [155], anddengue virus (DENV) replication. In addition, A. calamus. was reported to contain antimi-crobial compounds including β-asarone 29, eugenol 30, methyl isoeugenol 31, pinenes 32,myrcene 33, cymene 34 [156] and tatanan A [157]. (E)-Cinnamaldehyde 35, procyanidin B236 and (+)-catechin 37 isolated from Cinnamomum burmannii (Nees & T. Nees) Bl. showedantimicrobial activity [158]. Cuminaldehyde 38, β-pinene 39, and γ-terpinene 40 (Figure 9)isolated from Cuminum cyiminum seeds (locally known as ‘jinten’) showed antibacterialactivities against Bacillus cereus, Staphylococcus aureus, and Escherichia coli. The oil from theseed of this plant increases membrane permeability leading to swelling, and the reductionof membrane function, thereby changing cell morphology and causing cell death [159].Sechium edule was reported to possess antifungal activity against Candida spp and Aspergillusspp. [160]. D. metel showed antifungal activity against Aspergillus flavus, Microsporum canis,and Fusarium solani [161]. In addition, daturalone 41 isolated from Datura metel was re-ported to be effective against Klebsiella pneumoniae, Bacillus subtilis, Staphylococcus epidermis,and Staphylococcus aureus [161].C. burmanii extract, which contains E-cinnamaldehyde 35 and several polyphenols asa predominant volatile oil component, showed antimicrobial activities against B. cereus,Listeria monocytogenes, S. aureus Escherichia coli, and Salmonella anatum [158]. Crude polar ex-tracts (n-butane and ethanol) from C. burmanii were reported to be effective against Listeriamonocytogenes, Staphylococcus aureus, Escherichia coli O157:H7, and Salmonella anatum withthe inhibition zone ranging from 7.28–24.32 mm in which n-butane extract indicated higheractivity [27,29]. Curcuma longa, which contains curcumin, demonstrated a wide-spectrumof antimicrobial properties against Vibrio harveyi, Vibrio alginolyticus, Vibrio vulnificus, Vibrioparahaemolyticus, Vibrio cholerae, Bacillus subtilis, Bacillus cereus, Aeromonas hydrophila, Strepto-coccus agalactiae, Staphylococcus aureus, Staphylococcus intermedius, Staphylococcus epidermidis,and Edwardsiella tarda.Molecules 2022, 27, 7532 15 of 25olecules 2022, 27, x FOR PEER REVIEW 17  27   Figure 9. Cont.Molecules 2022, 27, 7532 16 of 25Molecules 2022, 27, x FOR PEER REVIEW 18 of 27    Figure 9. Antimicrobial compounds of plants used by Tenggerese (isolated from same species grown in other countries). 3.7. Antimalarial Activities There are a number of medicinal plants used by Tenggerese healers for treating fever and malaria. The methanolic extract of the root of Sesbania species (used by dukuns for treating fever arising from malaria infection) was reported to have significant anti-plas-modial activity, with a minimum inhibition concentration value of 62.5 μg/mL [169]. The dichloromethane extract of Acorus calamus was reported to have antiplasmodial activity with an IC50 value of 5.07 μg/mL against the chloroquine-sensitive (CQS) strain of Plasmo-dium falciparum [170]. Further studies showed that curcumin 1 isolated from the roots of Curcuma longa inhibited P. falciparum growth with an IC50 of ~5 μM. Additionally, in mice infected with Plasmodium berghei, oral administration of curcumin 1 was reported to have significant activity in reducing the blood parasitemia by 80–90% [171]. A previous study reported that curcumin 1 was responsible for the inhibition of glycogen synthase Kinase-3β, which might be contributing to the antimalarial activity [172]. In addition, the moder-ate anti-malarial activities of Datura metel leaf methanol extract were reported with an IC50 value of 22 ± 0.6 μg/mL against P.falciparum [173]. The aqueous extract of Cuminum cyminum seeds was also reported to have plasmodial growth inhibition by 9% against P. falciparum strain FCR3 [174]. From Erythrina variegata, Warangalone 56 (8(3,3-dimethyl-allyl)-4′-hydroxy-2‴,2‴-dimethylpyran-[6,7,b] isoflavone) (Figure 10) had been isolated from stem bark, and possessed antimalarial activity with an IC50 value of 4.8 and 3.7 μg/mL against both the sensitive (3D7) and resistant (K1) strain of P. falciparum [175].  Figure 10. Antimalarial compound of plants used by Tenggeresse (isolated from same species grown in other countries). 4. Conclusions This review evaluated 41 medicinal plants used by the indigenous people of the Tengger community, and revealed that 554 phytochemicals have been isolated from 33 plant species with flavonoids and terpenoids as the major chemical components. Most of Figure 9. Antimicrobial compounds of plants used by Tenggerese (isolated from same species grownin other countries).In addition, compounds isolated from these medicinal plants are known to exhibitvarious biological activities. For example, curcumin 1 elicited fungal inhibitory activitiesagainst four species of Rhizoctonia solani, Phytophthora infestans, Puccinia recondita, andBotrytis cinerea. The curcumin 1 also demonstrated antiviral activities against human im-munodeficiency virus (HIV), hepatitis b virus (HBV), hepatitis c virus (HCV), and humanpapillomavirus (HPV) [162]. The isoflavonoid compounds such as bidwillon B 42, ery-varins V 43, and eryvarins W 44 [163], and orientanol E 45 [164], which were isolatedfrom E. variegata, also demonstrated antibacterial activity against MRSA. Bidwillon B 42,i combination with upirocin, w s effec ive i eliminati g MRSA inf cti n of the nasalcavity d sk n [165]. Gallic acid 46 and essential oils present in Sesbania grandiflora [98] andFoeniculum vulgare [166] ere responsible for their antibacterial proper ies, respectively. TheF. vulgare essential oil contains trans-anethole 47, fenchone 48, and limonene 49, which werereported to possess potent bioactivities against Mycobacterium tuberculosa, Shigella dysente-riae, Shigella flexneri, Vibrio cholerae, Staphylococcus aureus and Escherichia coli [166]. Essentialoils in general are known for their antimicrobial properties and have great applicationsin making antimicrobial products, lotions, disinfectants and insect repellents (especiallymosquitoes) [167]. Secondary metabolites such as dillapiole 50, psoralen 51, bergapten52, scopoletin 53, imperatorin 54, and dillapional 55 from F. vulgare were reported to beresponsible for antibacterial activity [12,59]. Indonesia is also gifted with a diverse array oflichens, which showed potent antibacterial properties–an area worth exploring for chemicaland antimicrobial screening [168].3.7. Antimalarial ActivitiesThere are a number of medicinal plants used by Tenggerese healers for treating feverand malaria. The methanolic extract of the root of Sesbania species (used by dukunsfor treating fever arising from malaria infection) was reported to have significant anti-plasmodial activity, with a minimum inhibition concentration value of 62.5 µg/mL [169].The dichloromethane extract of Acorus calamus was reported to have antiplasmodial ac-tivity with an IC50 value of 5.07 µg/mL against the chloroquine-sensitive (CQS) strainof Plasmodium falciparum [170]. Further studies showed that curcumin 1 isolated fromthe roots of Curcuma longa inhibited P. falciparum growth with an IC50 of ~5 µM. Addi-tionally, in mice infected with Plasmodium berghei, oral administration of curcumin 1 wasreported to have significant activity in reducing the blood parasitemia by 80–90% [171]. Aprevious study reported that curcumin 1 was responsible for the inhibition of glycogensynthase Kinase-3β, which might be contributing to the antimalarial activity [172]. Inaddition, the moderate anti-malarial activities of Datura metel leaf methanol extract werereported with an IC50 value of 22 ± 0.6 µg/mL against P.falciparum [173]. The aqueousextract of Cuminum cyminum seeds was also reported to have plasmodial growth inhibitionMolecules 2022, 27, 7532 17 of 25by 9% against P. falciparum strain FCR3 [174]. From Erythrina variegata, Warangalone 56(8(3,3-dimethyl-allyl)-4′-hydroxy-2′′′,2′′′-dimethylpyran-[6,7,b] isoflavone) (Figure 10) hadbeen isolated from stem bark, and possessed antimalarial activity with an IC50 value of4.8 and 3.7 µg/mL against both the sensitive (3D7) and resistant (K1) strain of P. falci-parum [175].Molecules 2022, 27, x FOR PEER REVIEW 18 of 27    Figure 9. Antimicrobial compounds of plants used by Tenggerese (isolated from same species grown in other countries). 3.7. Antimalarial Activities There are a number of medicinal plants used by Tenggerese healers for treating fever and malaria. The methanolic extract of the root of Sesbania species (used by dukuns for treating fever arising from malaria infection) was reported to have significant anti-plas-modial activity, with a minimum inhibition concentration value of 62.5 µg/mL [169]. The dichloromethane extract of Acorus calamus was reported to have antiplasmodial activity with an IC50 value of 5.07 µg/mL against the chloroquine-sensitive (CQS) strain of Plasmo-dium falciparum [170]. Further studies showed that curcumin 1 isolated from the roots of Curcuma longa inhibited P. falciparum growth with an IC50 of ~5 µM. Additionally, in mice infected with Plasmodium berghei, oral administration of curcumin 1 was reported to have significant activity in reducing the blood parasitemia by 80–90% [171]. A previous study reported that curcumin 1 was responsible for the inhibition of glycogen synthase Kinase-3β, which might be contributing to the antimalarial activity [172]. In addition, the moder-ate anti-malarial activities of Datura metel leaf methanol extract were reported with an IC50 value of 22 ± 0.6 µg/mL against P.falciparum [173]. The aqueous extract of Cuminum cyminum seeds was also reported to have plasmodial growth inhibition by 9% agai st P. falciparu  strain FCR3 [174]. From Erythrina variegata, Warangalone 56 (8(3,3-dimethyl-allyl)-4′-hydroxy-2‴,2‴-dimethylpyran-[6,7,b] isoflavone) (Figure 10) had been isolated from stem bark, and possessed antimalarial activity with an IC50 value of 4.8 and 3.7 µg/ L against both the sensitive (3D7) and resistant (K1) strain of P. falciparum [175].  Figure 10. Antimalarial compound of plants used by Tenggeresse (isolated from same species grown in other countries). 4. Conclusions This review evaluated 41 medicinal plants used by the indigenous people of the Tengger community, and revealed that 554 phytochemicals have been isolated from 33 plant species with flavonoids and terpenoids as the major chemical components. Most of i re 10. ti alarial co pound of plants used by Teng eresse (isolated from same species grownin other countries).4. onclusionsThis revie evaluated 41 edicinal plants used by the indigenous people of theTengger community, and revealed that 554 phytochemicals have been isolated from 33 plantspecies with flavonoids and terpenoids as the major chemical components. Most of theplants and their phytochemicals have been tested for various pharmacological activitiesincluding anti-inflammatory, antimicrobial, antimalarial, wound healing, headache, andhypertension. Although these medicinal plants grow plentifully in Indonesia, most ofthe studies were reported on the plants that grow in China, India and Thailand. Onlythree medicinal plants were phytochemically studied in Indonesia. The research cost andlack of modern laboratory equipment have limited Indonesian researchers in conductingextensive phytochemical and pharmacological studies. The few species that have not beenevaluated scientifically presents great potential for biodiscovery. These medicinal plantsare: Cayratia clemaidea, Drymocallis arguta, Elaeocarpus longifolius, Physalis lagascae, Piperamplum, Rosa tomentosa and Tagetes tenuifolia. The Cayratia clemaidea, Drymocallis arguta,Elaeocarpus longifolius and Physalis lagascae species has a potential application in treatingdiarrhea, as this is common among the Indonesian population, especially living in the ruralareas where there is lack of food and water sanitation. In addition, Piper amplum, Rosatomentosa and Tagetes tenuifolia are valuable for bioprospecting to discover new therapeuticagents to treat rheumatism, fever agents and nasal bleeding.Author Contributions: Conceptualization, A.S.N., A.N.W.P., B.T., P.A.K. and P.W. methodology,A.S.N., A.N.W.P., B.T., P.A.K. and P.W.; software, A.S.N. and A.N.W.P.; validation, A.S.N., A.N.W.P.,B.T., P.A.K. and P.W.; formal analysis, A.S.N., A.N.W.P., B.T. and P.W.; investigation, A.S.N., A.N.W.P.,B.T., R.P.A., S.M., D.M.R., N.B.W. and P.W.; resources, A.S.N. and P.A.K.; data curation, A.S.N.,A.N.W.P., B.T., R.P.A., S.M., D.M.R. and N.B.W.; writing—original draft preparation, A.S.N., A.N.W.P.,B.T., R.P.A., S.M., D.M.R., N.B.W., P.A.K. and P.W.; writing—review and editing, A.S.N., D.M.R.,N.B.W., P.A.K. and P.W.; visualization, A.S.N., D.M.R. and A.N.W.P.; supervision, A.S.N., P.A.K. andP.W.; project administration, A.S.N., B.T. and N.B.W.; funding acquisition, A.S.N., A.N.W.P. and B.T.All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.Funding: This research received no external funding. The APC was funded by MDPI as an invited paper.Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.Acknowledgments: The authors thank the people of Tengger, the Faculty of Pharmacy for funding,Mohammad Hasan (Vice Chancellor, University of Jember), Sapanyana (Chief of Wonokerso Village)Molecules 2022, 27, 7532 18 of 25and Sutomo (Spiritual Leader of the People of Tengger). We thank Hildawati Ilham, Aries Syafitri,Syamsu Dhuha, Putri Sakinah, Virda Fitra Mandasari for technical support.Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.References1. Ekor, M. The growing use of herbal medicines: Issues relating to adverse reactions and challenges in monitoring safety.Front. Pharmacol. 2014, 4, 177. [CrossRef] [PubMed]2. Wangchuk, P.; Tobgay, T. Contributions of medicinal plants to the Gross National Happiness and Biodiscovery in Bhutan.J. Ethnobiol. Ethnomed. 2015, 11, 48. [CrossRef] [PubMed]3. Yuan, H.; Ma, Q.; Ye, L.; Piao, G. The Traditional Medicine and Modern Medicine from Natural Products. Molecules 2016, 21, 559.[CrossRef] [PubMed]4. Al Rashid, M.H.; Kundu, A.; Mandal, V.; Wangchuk, P.; Mandal, S.C. Preclinical and Clinical Trials of Indian Medicinal Plants inDisease Control. In Herbal Medicine in India: Indigenous Knowledge, Practice, Innovation and Its Value; Sen, S., Chakraborty, R., Eds.;Springer: Singapore, 2020; pp. 119–142. [CrossRef]5. Yeshi, K.; Gyal, Y.; Sabernig, K.; Phuntsho, J.; Tidwell, T.; Jamtsho, T.; Dhondup, R.; Tokar, E.; Wangchuk, P. An integrated medicineof Bhutan: Sowa Rigpa concepts, botanical identification, and the recorded phytochemical and pharmacological properties of theeastern Himalayan medicinal plants. Eur. J. Integr. Med. 2019, 29, 100927. [CrossRef]6. Nugraha, A.S.; Keller, P.a. Revealing indigenous Indonesian traditional medicine: Anti-infective agents. Nat. Prod. Commun.2011, 6, 1953–1966. [CrossRef]7. Roosita, K.; Kusharto, C.M.; Sekiyama, M.; Fachrurozi, Y.; Ohtsuka, R. Medicinal plants used by the villagers of a Sundanesecommunity in West Java, Indonesia. J. Ethnopharmacol. 2008, 115, 72–81. [CrossRef]8. Gewali, M.B.; Awale, S. Aspects of Traditional Medicine in Nepal; Institute of Natural Medicine University of Toyama: Toyama,Japan, 2008.9. Smith-Hefner, N.J. A Social History of Language Change in Highland East Java. J. Asian Stud. 2011, 48, 257–271. [CrossRef]10. Azrianingsih, R.; Kusumahati, A. Perception and appreciation of tenggerese of medicinal plants in Wonokitri Village, Tosarisubdistrict, Pasuruan Regency. AIP Conf. Proc. 2018, 2019, 020016. [CrossRef]11. Jadid, N.; Kurniawan, E.; Himayani, C.E.S.; Andriyani; Prasetyowati, I.; Purwani, K.I.; Muslihatin, W.; Hidayati, D.; Tjahjan-ingrum, I.T.D. An ethnobotanical study of medicinal plants used by the Tengger tribe in Ngadisari village, Indonesia. PLoS ONE2020, 15, e0235886. [CrossRef]12. Badgujar, S.A.-O.; Patel, V.V.; Bandivdekar, A.H. Foeniculum vulgare Mill: A review of its botany, phytochemistry, pharmacology,contemporary application, and toxicology. BioMed Res. Int. 2014, 2014, 32. [CrossRef]13. Paithankar, V.V.; Belsare, S.L.; Charde, R.M.; Vyas, J.V. Acorus Calamus: An Overview. Int. J. Biomed. Res. 2011, 2, 518–529.[CrossRef]14. Balakumbahan, R.; Rajamani, K.; Kumanan, K. Acorus calamus: An overview. J. Med. Plants Res. 2010, 4, 2740–2745.15. Imam, H.; Riaz, Z.; Azhar, M.; Sofi, G.; Hussain, A. Sweet flag (Acorus calamus Linn.): An incredible medicinal herb. Int. J. GreenPharm. 2013, 7, 288. [CrossRef]16. Hao, Z.-Y.; Liang, D.; Luo, H.; Liu, Y.-F.; Ni, G.; Zhang, Q.-J.; Li, L.; Si, Y.-K.; Sun, H.; Chen, R.-Y.; et al. Bioactive Sesquiterpenoidsfrom the Rhizomes of Acorus calamus. J. Nat. Prod. 2012, 75, 1083–1089. [CrossRef]17. El-Saber Batiha, G.; Magdy Beshbishy, A.; GWasef, L.; Elewa, Y.H.; AAl-Sagan, A.; Abd El-Hack, M.E.; Taha, A.E.; MAbd-Elhakim,Y.; Prasad Devkota, H. Chemical Constituents and Pharmacological Activities of Garlic (Allium sativum L.): A Review. Nutrients2020, 12, 872. [CrossRef] [PubMed]18. Rattanapan, J.; Sichaem, J.; Tip-Pyang, S. Chemical constituents and antioxidant activity from the stems of Alyxia reinwardtii.Rec. Nat. Prod. 2012, 6, 288–291.19. Souza, L.F.; de Barros, I.B.I.; Mancini, E.; Martino, L.D.; Scandolera, E.; Feo, V.D. Chemical Composition and Biological Activitiesof the Essential Oil from Anredera cordifolia Grown in Brazil. Nat. Prod. Commun. 2014, 9, 1934578X1400900730. [CrossRef]20. Liu, G.; Zhuang, L.; Song, D.; Lu, C.; Xu, X. Isolation, purification, and identification of the main phenolic compounds from leavesof celery (Apium graveolens L. var. dulce Mill./Pers.). J. Sep. Sci. 2017, 40, 472–479. [CrossRef]21. Hedayati, N.; Bemani Naeini, M.; Mohammadinejad, A.; Mohajeri, S.A. Beneficial effects of celery (Apium graveolens) on metabolicsyndrome: A review of the existing evidences. Phytother. Res. 2019, 33, 3040–3053. [CrossRef]22. Conserva, L.M.; Jesu Costa Ferreira, J. Borreria and Spermacoce species (Rubiaceae): A review of their ethnomedicinal properties,chemical constituents, and biological activities. Pharmacogn. Rev. 2012, 6, 46. [CrossRef]23. Noiarsa, P.; Yu, Q.; Matsunami, K.; Otsuka, H.; Ruchirawat, S.; Kanchanapoom, T. (Z)-3-Hexenyl diglycosides from Spermacocelaevis Roxb. J. Nat. Med. 2007, 61, 406–409. [CrossRef]24. Fernandes, F.; Valentão, P.; Sousa, C.; Pereira, J.A.; Seabra, R.M.; Andrade, P.B. Chemical and antioxidative assessment of dietaryturnip (Brassica rapa var. rapa L.). Food Chem. 2007, 105, 1003–1010. [CrossRef]25. Pérez-Vázquez, M.A.K.; Pacheco-Hernández, Y.; Lozoya-Gloria, E.; Mosso-González, C.; Ramírez-García, S.A.; Romero-Arenas,O.; Villa-Ruano, N. Peppermint Essential Oil and Its Major Volatiles as Protective Agents against Soft Rot Caused by Fusariumsambucinum in Cera Pepper (Capsicum pubescens). Chem. Biodivers. 2022, 19, e202100835. [CrossRef] [PubMed]Molecules 2022, 27, 7532 19 of 2526. Ahmad, I.; Arifianti, A.E.; Sakti, A.S.; Saputri, F.C.; Abdul, M.i. Simultaneous natural deep eutectic solvent-based ultrasonic-assisted extraction of bioactive compounds of cinnamon bark and sappan wood as a dipeptidyl peptidase IV inhibitor. Molecules2020, 25, 3832. [CrossRef]27. Liang, Y.; Li, Y.; Sun, A.; Liu, X. Chemical compound identification and antibacterial activity evaluation of cinnamon extractsobtained by subcritical n-butane and ethanol extraction. Food Sci. Nutr. 2019, 7, 2186–2193. [CrossRef] [PubMed]28. Muhammad, D.R.A.; Tuenter, E.; Patria, G.D.; Foubert, K.; Pieters, L.; Dewettinck, K. Phytochemical composition and antioxidantactivity of Cinnamomum burmannii Blume extracts and their potential application in white chocolate. Food Chem. 2021, 340, 127983.[CrossRef] [PubMed]29. Rahayu, D.U.; Hakim, R.A.; Mawarni, S.A.; Satriani, A.R. Indonesian Cinnamon (Cinnamomum burmannii): Extraction, FlavonoidContent, Antioxidant Activity, and Stability in the Presence of Ascorbic Acid. Cosmetics 2022, 9, 57. [CrossRef]30. Sethupathy, S.; Nithya, C.; Pandian, S.K. 2-Furaldehyde diethyl acetal from tender coconut water (Cocos nucifera) attenuatesbiofilm formation and quorum sensing-mediated virulence of Chromobacterium violaceum and Pseudomonas aeruginosa.Biofouling 2015, 31, 721–733. [CrossRef]31. Elsbaey, M.; Ibrahim, M.A.A.; Bar, F.A.; Elgazar, A.A. Chemical constituents from coconut waste and their in silico evaluation aspotential antiviral agents against SARS-CoV-2. South Afr. J. Bot. 2021, 141, 278–289. [CrossRef]32. Lima, E.B.C.; de Sousa, C.N.S.; Vasconcelos, G.S.; Meneses, L.N.; Silva Pereira, Y.F.E.; Ximenes, N.C.; Santos Júnior, M.A.; Matos,N.C.B.; Brito, R.; Miron, D.; et al. Antidepressant, antioxidant and neurotrophic properties of the standardized extract of Cocosnucifera husk fiber in mice. J. Nat. Med. 2016, 70, 510–521. [CrossRef]33. Zheljazkov, V.D.; Gawde, A.; Cantrell, C.L.; Astatkie, T.; Schlegel, V. Distillation Time as Tool for Improved Antimalarial Activityand Differential Oil Composition of Cumin Seed Oil. PLoS ONE 2015, 10, e0144120. [CrossRef] [PubMed]34. Aldulaimi, O. Screening of Fruits of Seven Plants Indicated for Medicinal Use in Iraq. Pharmacogn. Mag. 2017, 13, S189–S195.[CrossRef] [PubMed]35. Neethu, S.; Veena, S.K.; Indulekha, V.C.; Eapen, J.; Radhakrishnan, K.V. Phytoconstituents assessment and development of standardiza-tion protocol for ‘Nayopayam Kwatha’, a polyherbal Ayurvedic formulation. J. Ayurveda Integr. Med. 2021, 12, 489–499. [CrossRef][PubMed]36. Wuthi-udomlert, M.; Grisanapan, W.; Luanratana, O.; Caichompoo, W. Antifungal activity of Curcuma longa grown in Thailand.Southeast Asian J. Trop. Med. Public Health 2000, 31 (Suppl. 1), 178–182. [PubMed]37. Kim, D.S.; Kim, J.Y. Total synthesis of Calebin-A, preparation of its analogues, and their neuronal cell protectivity againstbeta-amyloid insult. Bioorganic Med. Chem. Lett. 2001, 11, 2541–2543. [CrossRef]38. Aratanechemuge, Y.; Komiya, T.; Moteki, H.; Katsuzaki, H.; Imai, K.; Hibasami, H. Selective induction of apoptosis by ar-turmerone isolated from turmeric (Curcuma longa L.) in two human leukemia cell lines, but not in human stomach cancer cell line.Int. J. Mol. Med. 2002, 9, 481–484. [CrossRef]39. Saha, A.; Kuzuhara, T.; Echigo, N.; Suganuma, M.; Fujiki, H. New role of (-)-epicatechin in enhancing the induction of growthinhibition and apoptosis in human lung cancer cells by curcumin. Cancer Prev. Res. 2010, 3, 953–962. [CrossRef]40. Sun, Y.; Zhang, J.; Zhou, J.; Huang, Z.; Hu, H.; Qiao, M.; Zhao, X.; Chen, D. Synergistic effect of cucurbitacin B in combinationwith curcumin via enhancing apoptosis induction and reversing multidrug resistance in human hepatoma cells. Eur. J. Pharmacol.2015, 768, 28–40. [CrossRef]41. Wang, Y.; Wang, L.; Zhu, X.; Wang, D.; Li, X. Choleretic Activity of Turmeric and its Active Ingredients. J. Food Sci. 2016, 81, H1800–H1806.[CrossRef]42. Lv, G.-P.; Hu, D.-J.; Zhou, Y.-Q.; Zhang, Q.-W.; Zhao, J.; Li, S.-P. Preparation and Application of Standardized Typical VolatileComponents Fraction from Turmeric (Curcuma longa L.) by Supercritical Fluid Extraction and Step Molecular Distillation. Molecules2018, 23, 1831. [CrossRef]43. Akter, J.; Islam, M.Z.; Takara, K.; Hossain, M.A.; Sano, A. Isolation and structural elucidation of antifungal compounds fromRyudai gold (Curcuma longa) against Fusarium solani sensu lato isolated from American manatee. Comp. Biochem. Physiol. Part C:Toxicol. Pharmacol. 2019, 219, 87–94. [CrossRef] [PubMed]44. Le, T.; Beaufay, C.; Nghiem, D.; Pham, T.; Mingeot-Leclercq, M.-P.; Quetin-Leclercq, J. Evaluation of the Anti-TrypanosomalActivity of Vietnamese Essential Oils, with Emphasis on Curcuma longa L. and Its Components. Molecules 2019, 24, 1158.[CrossRef] [PubMed]45. Guo, R.; Liu, Y.; Xu, Z.-P.; Xia, Y.-G.; Yang, B.-Y.; Kuang, H.-X. Withanolides from the leaves of Datura metel L. Phytochemistry2018, 155, 136–146. [CrossRef] [PubMed]46. Guo, R.; Liu, Y.; Pan, J.; Guan, W.; Yang, B.-Y.; Kuang, H.-X. A new sesquiterpenoid with cytotoxic and anti-inflammatory activityfrom the leaves of Datura metel L. Nat. Prod. Res. 2021, 35, 607–613. [CrossRef]47. Liu, Y.; Pan, J.; Sun, Y.-P.; Wang, X.; Liu, Y.; Yang, B.-Y.; Kuang, H.-X. Immunosuppressive withanolides from the flower of Daturametel L. Fitoterapia 2020, 141, 104468. [CrossRef] [PubMed]48. Liu, Y.; Wu, D.-D.; Zhou, Y.-Q.; Wu, J.-T.; Qi, Z.-T.; Algradi, A.M.; Pan, J.; Guan, W.; Yang, B.-Y.; Kuang, H.-X. A new ent-kauranediterpenoid from the pericarps of Datura metel. J. Asian Nat. Prod. Res. 2021, 1–7. [CrossRef]49. Han, X.-L.; Wang, H.; Zhang, Z.-H.; Tan, Y.; Wang, J.-H. Study on Chemical Constituents in Seeds of Datura metel from Xinjiang.Zhong Yao Cai Zhongyaocai J. Chin. Med. Mater. 2015, 38, 1646–1648.Molecules 2022, 27, 7532 20 of 2550. Miękus, N.; Iqbal, A.; Marszałek, K.; Puchalski, C.; Świergiel, A. Green Chemistry Extractions of Carotenoids from Daucus carotaL.-Supercritical Carbon Dioxide and Enzyme-Assisted Methods. Molecules 2019, 24, 4339. [CrossRef]51. Badalamenti, N.; Modica, A.; Ilardi, V.; Bruno, M.; Maresca, V.; Zanfardino, A.; Di Napoli, M.; Castagliuolo, G.; Varcamonti, M.;Basile, A. Daucus carota subsp. maximus (Desf.) Ball from Pantelleria, Sicily (Italy): Isolation of essential oils and evaluation oftheir bioactivity. Nat. Prod. Res. 2021, 1, 1–6. [CrossRef]52. Liu, R.; Choi, H.S.; Kim, S.-L.; Kim, J.-H.; Yun, B.-S.; Lee, D.-S. 6-Methoxymellein Isolated from Carrot (Daucus carota L.) TargetsBreast Cancer Stem Cells by Regulating NF-κB Signaling. Molecules 2020, 25, 4374. [CrossRef]53. Gaglio, R.; Barbera, M.; Aleo, A.; Lommatzsch, I.; La Mantia, T.; Settanni, L. Inhibitory Activity and Chemical Characterization ofDaucus carota subsp. maximus Essential Oils. Chem. Biodivers. 2017, 14, e1600477. [CrossRef] [PubMed]54. Rasul, A.; Khan, M.; Yu, B.; Ma, T.; Yang, H. Xanthoxyletin, a coumarin induces S phase arrest and apoptosis in human gastricadenocarcinoma SGC-7901 cells. Asian Pac. J. Cancer Prev. APJCP 2011, 12, 1219–1223. [PubMed]55. Tanaka, H.; Hirata, M.; Etoh, H.; Watanabe, N.; Shimizu, H.; Ahmad, M.; Terada, Y.; Fukai, T. Two diphenylpropan-1,2-diolsyringates from the roots of Erythrina variegata. J. Nat. Prod. 2002, 65, 1933–1935. [CrossRef] [PubMed]56. Liu, Q.; Yu, J.; Liao, X.; Zhang, P.; Chen, X. One-step separation of antioxidant compounds from Erythrina variegata by highspeed counter-current chromatography. J. Chromatogr. Sci. 2015, 53, 730–735. [CrossRef]57. Kobayashi, M.; Mahmud, T.; Yoshioka, N.; Shibuya, H.; Kitagawa, I. Indonesian medicinal plants. XXI. Inhibitors of Na+/H+exchanger from the bark of Erythrina variegata and the roots of Maclura cochinchinensis. Chem. Pharm. Bull. 1997, 45, 1615–1619.[CrossRef]58. Kunzemann, J.; Herrmann, K. [Isolation and identification of flavon(ol)-O-glycosides in caraway (Carum carvi L.), fennel(Foeniculum vulgare Mill.), anise (Pimpinella anisum L.), and coriander (Coriandrum sativum L.), and of flavon-C-glycosides in anise.I. Phenolics of spices (author’s transl)]. Z. Fur Lebensm. Unters. Forsch. 1977, 164, 194–200. [CrossRef]59. Kwon, Y.S.; Choi, W.G.; Kim, W.J.; cKim, W.K.; Kim, M.J.; Kang, W.H.; Kim, C.M. Antimicrobial constituents of foeniculumvulgare. Arch. Pharmacal. Res. 2002, 25, 154–157. [CrossRef]60. Senatore, F.; Oliviero, F.; Scandolera, E.; Taglialatela-Scafati, O.; Roscigno, G.; Zaccardelli, M.; De Falco, E. Chemical composition,antimicrobial and antioxidant activities of anethole-rich oil from leaves of selected varieties of fennel [Foeniculum vulgare Mill. ssp.vulgare var. azoricum (Mill.) Thell]. Fitoterapia 2013, 90, 214–219. [CrossRef]61. Váradyová, Z.; Pisarčíková, J.; Babják, M.; Hodges, A.; Mravčáková, D.; Kišidayová, S.; Königová, A.; Vadlejch, J.; Várady, M.Ovicidal and larvicidal activity of extracts from medicinal-plants against Haemonchus contortus. Exp. Parasitol. 2018, 195, 71–77.[CrossRef]62. Štrbac, F.; Bosco, A.; Maurelli, M.P.; Ratajac, R.; Stojanović, D.; Simin, N.; Orčić, D.; Pušić, I.; Krnjajić, S.; Sotiraki, S.; et al.Anthelmintic Properties of Essential Oils to Control Gastrointestinal Nematodes in Sheep-In Vitro and In Vivo Studies. Vet. Sci.2022, 9, 93. [CrossRef]63. Chiboub, W.; Sassi, A.B.; Amina, C.M.H.; Souilem, F.; El Ayeb, A.; Djlassi, B.; Ascrizzi, R.; Flamini, G.; Harzallah-Skhiri,F. Valorization of the Green Waste from Two Varieties of Fennel and Carrot Cultivated in Tunisia by Identification of thePhytochemical Profile and Evaluation of the Antimicrobial Activities of Their Essentials Oils. Chem. Biodivers. 2019, 16, e1800546.[CrossRef]64. Faudale, M.; Viladomat, F.; Bastida, J.; Poli, F.; Codina, C. Antioxidant Activity and Phenolic Composition of Wild, Edible, andMedicinal Fennel from Different Mediterranean Countries. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2008, 56, 1912–1920. [CrossRef] [PubMed]65. Parejo, I.; Jauregui, O.; Sánchez-Rabaneda, F.; Viladomat, F.; Bastida, J.; Codina, C. Separation and Characterization of PhenolicCompounds in Fennel (Foeniculum vulgare) Using Liquid Chromatography−Negative Electrospray Ionization Tandem MassSpectrometry. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2004, 52, 3679–3687. [CrossRef] [PubMed]66. Nassar, M.I.; Aboutabl, E.S.A.; Makled, Y.A.; El–Khrisy, E.D.A.; Osman, A.F. Secondary metabolites and pharmacology ofFoeniculum vulgare Mill. Subsp. Piperitum. Rev. Latinoam. Química 2010, 38, 10.67. Cherng, J.-M.; Chiang, W.; Chiang, L.-C. Immunomodulatory activities of common vegetables and spices of Umbelliferae and itsrelated coumarins and flavonoids. Food Chem. 2008, 106, 944–950. [CrossRef]68. Ghanem, M.T.M.; Radwan, H.M.A.; Mahdy, E.S.M.; Elkholy, Y.M.; Hassanein, H.D.; Shahat, A.A. Phenolic Compounds fromFoeniculum vulgare (Subsp. Piperitum) (Apiaceae) Herb and Evaluation of Hepatoprotective Antioxidant Activity. Pharmacogn. Res.2012, 4, 5.69. Dharmaratne, H.R.W.; Piyasena, K.G.N.P.; Tennakoon, S.B. A geranylated biphenyl derivative from Garcinia malvgostana. Nat.Prod. Res. 2005, 19, 239–243. [CrossRef]70. Gopalakrishnan, G.; Banumathi, B.; Suresh, G. Evaluation of the antifungal activity of natural xanthones from Garcinia mangostanaand their synthetic derivatives. J. Nat. Prod. 1997, 60, 519–524. [CrossRef]71. Ngawhirunpat, T.; Opanasopi, P.; Sukma, M.; Sittisombut, C.; Kat, A.; Adachi, I. Antioxidant, free radical-scavenging activity andcytotoxicity of different solvent extracts and their phenolic constituents from the fruit hull of mangosteen (Garcinia mangostana).Pharm. Biol. 2010, 48, 55–62. [CrossRef]72. Das, B.; Anjani, G. ChemInform Abstract: Phytochemicals. Part 29. Gossypidien, a Lignan from Stems of Jatropha gossypifollia.Cheminform 2010, 30, 1. [CrossRef]73. Oduola, T.; Adeosun, G.; Oduola, T.; Avwioro, G.; Oyeniyi, M. Mechanism of Action of Jatropha Gossypifolia Stem Latex As aHaemostatic Agent. Eur. J. Gen. Med. 2004, 2, 140–143. [CrossRef]Molecules 2022, 27, 7532 21 of 2574. Saishri, R.; Ravichandran, N.; Vadivel, V.; Brindha, P. Pharmacognostic studies on leaf of Jatropha Gossypifolia L. Int. J. Pharm. Sci.Res. 2016, 7, 163–173. [CrossRef]75. Povichit, N.; Phrutivorapongkul, A.; Suttajit, M.; Chaiyasut, C.; Leelapornpisid, P. Phenolic content and in vitro inhibitory effectson oxidation and protein glycation of some Thai medicinal plants. Pak. J. Pharm. Sci. 2010, 23, 403–408. [PubMed]76. Tungcharoen, P.; Chatchai, W.; Tansakul, P.; Nakamura, S.; Matsuda, H.; Tewtrakul, S. Anti-inflammatory effect of isopimaranediterpenoids from Kaempferia galanga. Phytother. Res. 2019, 34, 612–623. [CrossRef]77. Wen, C.; Wang, D.; Li, X.; Huang, T.; Huang, C.; Hu, K. Targeted isolation and identification of bioactive compounds loweringcholesterol in the crude extracts of crabapples using UPLC-DAD-MS-SPE/NMR based on pharmacology-guided PLS-DA.J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal. 2018, 150, 144–151. [CrossRef]78. Li, S.-S.; Hu, L.-F.; Zhao, Y.-X.; Zuo, W.-J.; Zeng, Y.-B.; Li, X.-N.; Mei, W.-L.; Dai, H.-F. A new diterpene from the stems of Manihotesculenta. J. Asian Nat. Prod. Res. 2011, 13, 961–964. [CrossRef]79. Yi, B.; Hu, L.; Mei, W.; Zhou, K.; Wang, H.; Luo, Y.; Wei, X.; Dai, H. Antioxidant phenolic compounds of cassava (Manihot esculenta)from Hainan. Molecules 2011, 16, 10157–10167. [CrossRef]80. Silva, A.A.S.; Morais, S.M.; Falcão, M.J.C.; Vieira, I.G.P.; Ribeiro, L.M.; Viana, S.M.; Teixeira, M.J.; Barreto, F.S.; Carvalho, C.A.;Cardoso, R.P.A.; et al. Activity of cycloartane-type triterpenes and sterols isolated from Musa paradisiaca fruit peel againstLeishmania infantum chagasi. Phytomedicine 2014, 21, 1419–1423. [CrossRef]81. Fahim, M.; Ibrahim, M.; Zahiruddin, S.; Parveen, R.; Khan, W.; Ahmad, S.; Shrivastava, B.; Shrivastava, A.K. TLC-bioautographyidentification and GC-MS analysis of antimicrobial and antioxidant active compounds in Musa × paradisiaca L. fruit pulp essentialoil. Phytochem. Anal. PCA 2019, 30, 332–345. [CrossRef]82. Quan, N.V.; Tran, H.-D.; Xuan, T.D.; Ahmad, A.; Dat, T.D.; Khanh, T.D.; Teschke, R. Momilactones A and B Are α-Amylase andα-Glucosidase Inhibitors. Molecules 2019, 24, 482. [CrossRef]83. Cho, J.-G.; Cha, B.-J.; Min Lee, S.; Shrestha, S.; Jeong, R.-H.; Sung Lee, D.; Kim, Y.-C.; Lee, D.-G.; Kang, H.-C.; Kim, J.; et al.Diterpenes from the roots of Oryza sativa L. and their inhibition activity on NO production in LPS-stimulated RAW264.7macrophages. Chem. Biodivers. 2015, 12, 1356–1364. [CrossRef] [PubMed]84. Lee, T.K.; Lee, D.; Yu, J.S.; Jo, M.S.; Baek, S.C.; Shin, M.-S.; Ko, Y.-J.; Kang, K.S.; Kim, K.H. Biological Evaluation of a New Lignanfrom the Roots of Rice (Oryza sativa). Chem. Biodivers. 2018, 15, e1800333. [CrossRef] [PubMed]85. Kang, H.R.; Yun, H.S.; Lee, T.K.; Lee, S.; Kim, S.-H.; Moon, E.; Park, K.-M.; Kim, K.H. Chemical Characterization of Novel NaturalProducts from the Roots of Asian Rice (Oryza sativa) that Control Adipocyte and Osteoblast Differentiation. J. Agric. Food Chem.2018, 66, 2677–2684. [CrossRef]86. Manosroi, A.; Chutoprapat, R.; Abe, M.; Manosroi, W.; Manosroi, J. Anti-aging efficacy of topical formulations containingniosomes entrapped with rice bran bioactive compounds. Pharm. Biol. 2012, 50, 208–224. [CrossRef]87. Cho, J.-G.; Huh, J.; Jeong, R.-H.; Cha, B.-J.; Shrestha, S.; Lee, D.-G.; Kang, H.-C.; Kim, J.-Y.; Baek, N.-I. Inhibition effect of phenylcompounds from the Oryza sativa roots on melanin production in murine B16-F10 melanoma cells. Nat. Prod. Res. 2015, 29, 1052–1054.[CrossRef] [PubMed]88. Soldera-Silva, A.; Seyfried, M.; Campestrini, L.H.; Zawadzki-Baggio, S.F.; Minho, A.P.; Molento, M.B.; Maurer, J.B.B. Assessmentof anthelmintic activity and bio-guided chemical analysis of Persea americana seed extracts. Vet. Parasitol. 2018, 251, 34–43.[CrossRef]89. Louis, M.R.L.M.; Rani, V.P.; Krishnan, P.; Reegan, A.D.; Balakrishna, K.; Ignacimuthu, S.; Packiam, S.M.; Maheswaran, R.; Shirota,O. Mosquito Larvicidal Activity of Compounds from Unripe Fruit Peel of Avocado (Persea americana Mill.). Appl. Biochem.Biotechnol. 2022, 1, 1–12. [CrossRef]90. Reis, I.M.A.; Umehara, E.; Conceição, R.S.; de M. Oliveira, L.; Coelho Dos, S.M., Jr.; Costa-Silva, T.A.; Amaral, M.; Tempone, A.G.;Branco, A.; Lago, J.H.G. γ-Lactones from Persea americana and Persea fulva—In Vitro and in Silico Evaluation of Trypanosomacruzi Activity. Chem. Biodivers. 2021, 18, e2100362. [CrossRef]91. Nayaka, N.M.D.M.W.; Sasadara, M.M.V.; Sanjaya, D.A.; Yuda, P.E.S.K.; Dewi, N.L.K.A.A.; Cahyaningsih, E.; Hartati, R. Piper betle (L):Recent Review of Antibacterial and Antifungal Properties, Safety Profiles, and Commercial Applications. Molecules 2021, 26, 2321.[CrossRef]92. San, T.T.; Wang, Y.-H.; Hu, D.-B.; Yang, J.; Zhang, D.-D.; Xia, M.-Y.; Yang, X.-F.; Yang, Y.-P. A new sesquineolignan and four newneolignans isolated from the leaves of Piper betle, a traditional medicinal plant in Myanmar. Bioorganic Med. Chem. Lett. 2021, 31, 127682.[CrossRef]93. Chen, D.-Z.; Xiong, H.-B.; Tian, K.; Guo, J.-M.; Huang, X.-Z.; Jiang, Z.-Y. Two new sphingolipids from the leaves of Piper betle L.Molecules 2013, 18, 11241–11249. [CrossRef] [PubMed]94. Amin, S.A.; Bhattacharya, P.; Basak, S.; Gayen, S.; Nandy, A.; Saha, A. Pharmacoinformatics study of Piperolactam A from Piperbetle root as new lead for non steroidal anti fertility drug development. Comput. Biol. Chem. 2017, 67, 213–224. [CrossRef]95. Miyasaki, Y.; Rabenstein, J.D.; Rhea, J.; Crouch, M.-L.; Mocek, U.M.; Kittell, P.E.; Morgan, M.A.; Nichols, W.S.; Van Benschoten,M.M.; Hardy, W.D.; et al. Isolation and characterization of antimicrobial compounds in plant extracts against multidrug-resistantAcinetobacter baumannii. PLoS ONE 2013, 8, e61594. [CrossRef] [PubMed]96. Alves, V.G.; Souza, A.G.; Chiavelli, L.U.R.; Ruiz, A.L.T.G.; Carvalho, J.E.; Pomini, A.M.; Silva, C.C. Phenolic compounds andanticancer activity of commercial sugarcane cultivated in Brazil. An. Acad. Bras. Cienc. 2016, 88, 1201–1209. [CrossRef] [PubMed]Molecules 2022, 27, 7532 22 of 2597. Trejo-Moreno, C.; Castro-Martínez, G.; Méndez-Martínez, M.; Jiménez-Ferrer, J.E.; Pedraza-Chaverri, J.; Arrellín, G.; Zamilpa, A.;Medina-Campos, O.N.; Lombardo-Earl, G.; Barrita-Cruz, G.J.; et al. Acetone fraction from Sechium edule (Jacq.) S.w. edible rootsexhibits anti-endothelial dysfunction activity. J. Ethnopharmacol. 2018, 220, 75–86. [CrossRef]98. Anantaworasakul, P.; Hamamoto, H.; Sekimizu, K.; Okonogi, S. Biological activities and antibacterial biomarker of Sesbaniagrandiflora bark extract. Drug Discov. Ther. 2017, 11, 70–77. [CrossRef]99. Noviany, N.; Nurhidayat, A.; Hadi, S.; Suhartati, T.; Aziz, M.; Purwitasari, N.; Subasman, I. Sesbagrandiflorain A and B: Isolationof two new 2-arylbenzofurans from the stem bark of Sesbania grandiflora. Nat. Prod. Res. 2018, 32, 2558–2564. [CrossRef]100. Noviany, N.; Samadi, A.; Carpenter, E.L.; Abugrain, M.E.; Hadi, S.; Purwitasari, N.; Indra, G.; Indra, A.; Mahmud, T. Structuralrevision of sesbagrandiflorains A and B, and synthesis and biological evaluation of 6-methoxy-2-arylbenzofuran derivatives. J. Nat.Med. 2020, 75, 66–75. [CrossRef]101. Tjahjandarie, T.S.; Tanjung, M.; Saputri, R.D.; Rahayu, D.O.; Gunawan Alfiah Nur, I.; Aldin, M.F. Two new 2-arylbenzofuransfrom Sesbania grandiflora L. and their cytotoxicity towards cancer cell. Nat. Prod. Res. 2020, 35, 5637–5642. [CrossRef]102. Kang, J.-H.; Shi, F.; Jones, A.D.; Marks, M.D.; Howe, G.A. Distortion of trichome morphology by the hairless mutation of tomatoaffects leaf surface chemistry. J. Exp. Bot. 2009, 61, 1053–1064. [CrossRef]103. Takahashi, H.; Hara, H.; Goto, T.; Kamakari, K.; Wataru, N.; Mohri, S.; Suzuki, H.; Shibata, D.; Kawada, T. 13-Oxo-9(Z),11(E),15(Z)-octadecatrienoic Acid Activates Peroxisome Proliferator-Activated Receptor γ in Adipocytes. Lipids 2014, 50, 3–12. [CrossRef][PubMed]104. Seong, S.H.; Jung, H.A.; Choi, J.S. Discovery of Flazin, an Alkaloid Isolated from Cherry Tomato Juice, As a Novel Non-EnzymaticProtein Glycation Inhibitor via in Vitro and in Silico Studies. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2021, 69, 3647–3657. [CrossRef] [PubMed]105. Fuentes, E.; Alarcón, M.; Astudillo, L.; Valenzuela, C.; Gutiérrez, M.; Palomo, I. Protective mechanisms of guanosine from Solanumlycopersicum on agonist-induced platelet activation: Role of sCD40L. Molecules 2013, 18, 8120–8135. [CrossRef] [PubMed]106. Li, C.-X.; Song, X.-Y.; Zhao, W.-Y.; Yao, G.-D.; Lin, B.; Huang, X.-X.; Li, L.-Z.; Song, S.-J. Characterization of enantiomeric lig-nanamides from Solanum nigrum L. and their neuroprotective effects against MPP(+)-induced SH-SY5Y cells injury. Phytochemistry2019, 161, 163–171. [CrossRef]107. Gu, X.-Y.; Shen, X.-F.; Wang, L.; Wu, Z.-W.; Li, F.; Chen, B.; Zhang, G.-L.; Wang, M.-K. Bioactive steroidal alkaloids from the fruitsof Solanum nigrum. Phytochemistry 2018, 147, 125–131. [CrossRef]108. Zhou, X.-L.; He, X.-J.; Zhou, G.-X.; Ye, W.-C.; Yao, X.-S. Pregnane glycosides from Solanum nigrum. J. Asian Nat. Prod. Res. 2007, 9, 517–523.[CrossRef]109. Jeong, J.B.; De Lumen, B.O.; Jeong, H.J. Lunasin peptide purified from Solanum nigrum L. protects DNA from oxidative damageby suppressing the generation of hydroxyl radical via blocking fenton reaction. Cancer Lett. 2010, 293, 58–64. [CrossRef]110. Fagbemi, K.O.; Aina, D.A.; Olajuyigbe, O.O. Soxhlet Extraction versus Hydrodistillation Using the Clevenger Apparatus: AComparative Study on the Extraction of a Volatile Compound from Tamarindus indica Seeds. Sci. World J. 2021, 2021, 5961586.[CrossRef]111. Sudjaroen, Y.; Haubner, R.; Würtele, G.; Hull, W.E.; Erben, G.; Spiegelhalder, B.; Changbumrung, S.; Bartsch, H.; Owen, R.W.Isolation and structure elucidation of phenolic antioxidants from Tamarind (Tamarindus indica L.) seeds and pericarp. Food Chem.Toxicol. Int. J. Publ. Br. Ind. Biol. Res. Assoc. 2005, 43, 1673–1682. [CrossRef]112. Rattarom, R.; Sakpakdeejaroen, I.; Hansakul, P.; Itharat, A. Cytotoxic activity against small cell lung cancer cell line andchromatographic fingerprinting of six isolated compounds from the ethanolic extract of Benjakul. J. Med. Assoc. Thail. ChotmaihetThangphaet 2014, 97 (Suppl. 8), S70-5.113. Sekiwa, Y.; Kobayashi, A.; Kubota, K.; Takenaka, M. First isolation of geranyl disaccharides from ginger and their relations toaroma formation. Nat. Prod. Lett. 2001, 15, 267–274. [CrossRef] [PubMed]114. Della Valle, A.; Dimmito, M.P.; Zengin, G.; Pieretti, S.; Mollica, A.; Locatelli, M.; Cichelli, A.; Novellino, E.; Ak, G.; Yerlikaya,S.; et al. Exploring the Nutraceutical Potential of Dried Pepper Capsicum annuum L. on Market from Altino in Abruzzo Region.Antioxidants 2020, 9, 400. [CrossRef] [PubMed]115. Yakubu, M.T.; Nurudeen, Q.O.; Salimon, S.S.; Yakubu, M.O.; Jimoh, R.O.; Nafiu, M.O.; Akanji, M.A.; Oladiji, A.T.; Williams, F.E.Antidiarrhoeal Activity of Musa paradisiaca Sap in Wistar Rats. Evid.-Based Complement. Altern. Med. Ecam 2015, 4, 1–9. [CrossRef]116. Roberts, C.L.; Keita, Å.V.; Parsons, B.N.; Prorok-Hamon, M.; Knight, P.; Kennedy, N.; Söderholm, J.D.; Rhodes, J.M.; Campbell, B.J.Soluble plantain fibre blocks epithelial adhesion and M-cell translocation of intestinal pathogens. Gut 2011, 60, A96. [CrossRef]117. Gunasekaran, D.; Chandramohan, A.; Karthikeyan, K.; Balasubramaniam, B.; Jagadeesan, P.; Soundararajan, P. Effect of GreenBanana (Musa paradisiaca) on Recovery in Children With Acute Watery Diarrhea With No Dehydration: A Randomized ControlledTrial. Indian Pediatr. 2020, 57, 1114–1118. [CrossRef] [PubMed]118. Alvarez-Acosta, T.; León, C.; Acosta-González, S.; Parra-Soto, H.; Cluet-Rodriguez, I.; Rossell, M.R.; Colina-Chourio, J.A.Beneficial Role of Green Plantain [Musa paradisiaca] in the Management of Persistent Diarrhea: A Prospective Randomized Trial.J. Am. Coll. Nutr. 2009, 28, 169–176. [CrossRef]119. Yuniarti, W.M.; Lukiswanto, B.S. Effects of herbal ointment containing the leaf extracts of Madeira vine (Anredera cordifolia (Ten.)Steenis) for burn wound healing process on albino rats. Vet. World 2017, 10, 808–813. [CrossRef]120. Akbik, D.; Ghadiri, M.; Chrzanowski, W.; Rohanizadeh, R. Curcumin as a wound healing agent. Life Sci. 2014, 116, 1–7. [CrossRef]121. Pazyar, N.; Feily, A. Garlic in dermatology. Dermatol. Rep. 2011, 3, e4. [CrossRef]Molecules 2022, 27, 7532 23 of 25122. Ejaz, S.; Chekarova, I.; Cho, J.; Lee, S.; Ashraf, S.; Lim, C. Effect of aged garlic extract on wound healing: A new frontier in woundmanagement. Drug Chem. Toxicol. 2009, 32, 191–203. [CrossRef]123. Mustafa, T.; Srivastava, K.C. Ginger (Zingiber officinale) in migraine headache. J. Ethnopharmacol. 1990, 29, 267–273. [CrossRef]124. Martins, L.B.; Rodrigues, A.M.d.S.; Monteze, N.M.; Tibaes, J.R.B.; Amaral, M.H.A.; Gomez, R.S.; Teixeira, A.L.; Ferreira, A.V.M.Double-blind placebo-controlled randomized clinical trial of ginger (Zingiber officinale Rosc.) in the prophylactic treatment ofmigraine. Cephalalgia 2019, 40, 88–95. [CrossRef] [PubMed]125. Kim, Y.J.; Lim, H.-S.; Kim, B.-Y.; Seo, C.-S.; Jeong, S.-J. Quantitative Analysis and Biological Efficacies regarding the Neuroprotec-tive and Antineuroinflammatory Actions of the Herbal Formula Jodeungsan in HT22 Hippocampal Cells and BV-2 Microglia.Evid.-Based Complement. Altern. Med. 2017, 2017, 6360836. [CrossRef] [PubMed]126. Martin, B.R. Multimodal Care for Headaches, Lumbopelvic Pain, and Dysmenorrhea in a Woman With Endometriosis: A CaseReport. J. Chiropr. Med. 2021, 20, 148–157. [CrossRef]127. Liu, Z.; Huang, P.; Law, S.; Tian, H.; Leung, W.; Xu, C. Preventive Effect of Curcumin Against Chemotherapy-Induced Side-Effects.Front. Pharmacol. 2018, 9, 1374. [CrossRef]128. Mittal, N.; Joshi, R.; Hota, D.; Chakrabarti, A. Evaluation of antihyperalgesic effect of curcumin on formalin-induced orofacialpain in rat. Phytother. Res. 2009, 23, 507–512. [CrossRef]129. Young, H.-Y.; Luo, Y.-L.; Cheng, H.-Y.; Hsieh, W.-C.; Liao, J.-C.; Peng, W.-H. Analgesic and anti-inflammatory activities of[6]-gingerol. J. Ethnopharmacol. 2005, 96, 207–210. [CrossRef]130. Choi, E.M.; Hwang, J.K. Antiinflammatory, analgesic and antioxidant activities of the fruit of Foeniculum vulgare. Fitoterapia2004, 75, 557–565. [CrossRef]131. Li, C.; Cai, Q.; Wu, X.; Tan, Z.; Yao, L.; Huang, S.; Zhang, W.; Hong, Z.; Chen, Z.; Zhang, L.A.-O. Anti-inflammatory Study on theConstituents of Angelica sinensis (Oliv.) Diels, Angelica dahurica (Hoffm.) Benth. & Hook.f. ex Franch. & Sav., Angelica pubescenceMaxim and Foeniculum vulgare Mill. J. Essent. Oils 2022, 71, 1207–1219.132. Alazadeh, M.; Azadbakht, M.; Niksolat, F.; Asgarirad, H.; Moosazadeh, M.; Ahmadi, A.; Yousefi, S.S. Effect of sweet fennel seedextract capsule on knee pain in women with knee osteoarthritis. Complement. Ther. Clin. Pract. 2020, 40, 101219. [CrossRef]133. Rifqiyati, N.; Wahyuni, A. Fennel (Foeniculum vulgare) leaf infusion effect on mammary gland activity and kidney function oflactating rats. Nusant. Biosci. 2019, 11, 5. [CrossRef]134. Dwita, L.P.; Hikmawanti, N.P.E.; Yeni; Supandi. Extract, fractions, and ethyl-p-methoxycinnamate isolate from Kaempferia galangaElicit anti-inflammatory activity by limiting leukotriene B4 (LTB4) production. J. Tradit. Complement. Med. 2021, 11, 563–569. [CrossRef][PubMed]135. Umar, M.I.; Asmawi, M.Z.; Sadikun, A.; Atangwho, I.J.; Yam, M.F.; Altaf, R.; Ahmed, A. Bioactivity-guided isolation of ethyl-p-methoxycinnamate, an anti-inflammatory constituent, from Kaempferia galanga L. extracts. Molecules 2012, 17, 8720–8734.[CrossRef] [PubMed]136. Jagadish, P.C.; Latha, K.P.; Mudgal, J.; Nampurath, G.K. Extraction, characterization and evaluation of Kaempferia galanga L.(Zingiberaceae) rhizome extracts against acute and chronic inflammation in rats. J. Ethnopharmacol. 2016, 194, 434–439. [CrossRef][PubMed]137. Muhammad Ihtisham, U.; Mohd Zaini, A.; Amirin, S.; Amin Malik Shah Abdul, M.; Fouad Saleih, R.A.-S.; Loiy Elsir Ahmed, H.;Rabia, A.; Mohamed, B.K.A. Ethyl-p-methoxycinnamate isolated from kaempferia galanga inhibits inflammation by suppressinginterleukin-1, tumor necrosis factor-α, and angiogenesis by blocking endothelial functions. Clinics 2014, 69, 134–144. [CrossRef]138. Xavier-Santos, J.B.; Félix-Silva, J.; Passos, J.G.R.; Gomes, J.A.S.; Fernandes, J.M.; Garcia, V.B.; de Araujo-Junior, R.F.; Zucolotto,S.M.; Silva-Junior, A.A.; Fernandes-Pedrosa, M.F. Development of an effective and safe topical anti-inflammatory gel containingJatropha gossypiifolia leaf extract: Results from a pre-clinical trial in mice. J. Ethnopharmacol. 2018, 227, 268–278. [CrossRef]139. Ledon, N.; Casaco, A.; Remirez, D.; González, A.; Cruz, J.; Gonzalez, R.; Capote, A.; Tolón, Z.; Rojas, E.; Rodríguez, V.J.; et al.Effects of a mixture of fatty acids from sugar cane (Saccharum officinarum L.) wax oil in two models of inflammation: Zymosan-induced arthritis and mice tail test of psoriasis. Phytomedicine Int. J. Phytother. Phytopharm. 2007, 14, 690–695. [CrossRef]140. Ledon, N. Anti-inflammatory and analgesic effects of a mixture of fatty acids isolated and purified from sugar cane wax oil.Planta Med. 2003, 2069, 367–369. [CrossRef]141. Alotaibi, B.; Mokhtar, F.A.-O.; El-Masry, T.A.; Elekhnawy, E.; Mostafa, S.A.; Abdelkader, D.H.; Elharty, M.E.; Saleh, A.; Negm,W.A.-O. Antimicrobial Activity of Brassica rapa L. Flowers Extract on Gastrointestinal Tract Infections and Antiulcer PotentialAgainst Indomethacin-Induced Gastric Ulcer in Rats Supported by Metabolomics Profiling. J. Inflamm. Res. 2021, 14, 7411.[CrossRef]142. Nugroho, A.E.; Wijayanti, A.D.; Mutmainah, M.; Susilowati, R.; Rahmawati, N. Gastroprotective Effect of Combination of HotWater Extracts of Licorice (Glycyrrhiza glabra), Pulasari Stem Bark (Alyxia reinwardtii), and Sembung Leaf (Blumea balsamifera)Against Aspirin-Induced Gastric Ulcer Model Rats. J. Evid. Based Complement. Altern. Med. 2016, 21, NP77–NP84. [CrossRef]143. Mollica, A.; Stefanucci, A.; Zengin, G.; Locatelli, M.; Macedonio, G.; Orlando, G.; Ferrante, C.; Menghini, L.; Recinella, L.; Leone,S.; et al. Polyphenolic composition, enzyme inhibitory effects ex-vivo and in-vivo studies on two Brassicaceae of north-centralItaly. Biomed. Pharmacother. 2018, 107, 129–138. [CrossRef] [PubMed]144. Chauhan, N. Plants Used as Antihypertensive. Nat. Prod. Bioprospect. 2020, 11, 155–184. [CrossRef]145. Siska, S.; Mun‘im, A.; Bahtiar, A.; Suyatna, F.D. Effect of Apium graveolens Extract Administration on the Pharmacokinetics ofCaptopril in the Plasma of Rats. Sci. Pharm. 2018, 86, 6. [CrossRef] [PubMed]Molecules 2022, 27, 7532 24 of 25146. Márquez-Ramírez, C.; Paz, J.; Ortiz-Avila, O.; Raya-Farias, A.; González-Hernández, J.; Rodríguez-Orozco, A.; Salgado-Garciglia,R.; Saavedra-Molina, A.; Godínez-Hernández, D.; Cortés-Rojo, C. Comparative effects of avocado oil and losartan on bloodpressure, renal vascular function and mitochondrial oxidative stress in hypertensive rats. Nutrition 2018, 54, 60–67. [CrossRef]147. Sokpe, A.; Mensah, M.; Koffuor, G.; Thomford, K.P.; Arthur, R.; Jibira, Y.; Baah, M.; Adedi, B.; Agbemenyah, H. Hypotensive andAntihypertensive Properties and Safety for Use of Annona muricata and Persea americana and Their Combination Products.Evid. Based Complement. Altern. Med. 2020, 6, 1–13. [CrossRef] [PubMed]148. Rong, H.; Alashi, A.; Malomo, S.; Girgih, A.; Chao, D.; Ju, X.; Aluko, R. Antihypertensive and free radical scavenging propertiesof enzymatic rapeseed protein hydrolysates. Food Chem. 2013, 141, 153–159. [CrossRef]149. He, R.; Malomo, S.A.; Girgih, A.T.; Ju, X.; Aluko, R.E. Glycinyl-Histidinyl-Serine (GHS), a Novel Rapeseed Protein-DerivedPeptide Has Blood Pressure-Lowering Effect in Spontaneously Hypertensive Rats. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2013, 61, 8396–8402.[CrossRef]150. Simaratanamongkol, A.; Umehara, K.; Noguchi, H.; Panichayupakaranant, P. Identification of a new angiotensin-convertingenzyme (ACE) inhibitor from Thai edible plants. Food Chem. 2014, 165, 92–97. [CrossRef]151. Prasad, A.; Devi, A.T.; Prasad, M.N.N.; Zameer, F.; Shruthi, G.; Shivamallu, C. Phyto anti-biofilm elicitors as potential inhibitorsofHelicobacter pylori. 3 Biotech 2019, 9, 53. [CrossRef]152. Kim, W.-J.; Hwang, K.-H.; Park, D.-G.; Kim, T.-J.; Kim, D.-W.; Choi, D.-K.; Moon, W.-K.; Lee, K.-H. Major constituents andantimicrobial activity of Korean herb Acorus calamus. Nat. Prod. Res. 2011, 25, 1278–1281. [CrossRef]153. Aqil, F.; Ahmad, I.; Owais, M. Evaluation of anti-methicillin-resistantStaphylococcus aureus (MRSA) activity and synergy ofsome bioactive plant extracts. Biotechnol. J. 2006, 1, 1093–1102. [CrossRef] [PubMed]154. Mickymaray, S.; Al Aboody, M.S. In Vitro Antioxidant and Bactericidal Efficacy of 15 Common Spices: Novel Therapeutics forUrinary Tract Infections? Medicina 2019, 55, 289. [CrossRef] [PubMed]155. Ahmad, I.; Aqil, F. In vitro efficacy of bioactive extracts of 15 medicinal plants against ESβL-producing multidrug-resistant entericbacteria. Microbiol. Res. 2007, 162, 264–275. [CrossRef]156. Sharma, V.; Singh, I.; Chaudhary, P. Acorus calamus (The Healing Plant): A review on its medicinal potential, micropropagationand conservation. Nat. Prod. Res. 2014, 28, 1454–1466. [CrossRef]157. Yao, X.; Ling, Y.; Guo, S.; He, S.; Wu, W.; Zhang, Q.; Zou, M.; Nandakumar, K.S.; Chen, X.; Liu, S. Tatanan A from the Acoruscalamus L. root inhibited dengue virus proliferation and infections. Phytomedicine 2018, 42, 258–267. [CrossRef]158. Shan, B.; Cai Yz Fau-Brooks, J.D.; Brooks Jd Fau-Corke, H.; Corke, H. Antibacterial properties and major bioactive components ofcinnamon stick (Cinnamomum burmannii): Activity against foodborne pathogenic bacteria. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2007, 55, 5484–5490.[CrossRef] [PubMed]159. Wongkattiya, N.; Sanguansermsri, P.; Fraser, I.H.; Sanguansermsri, D.A.-O. Antibacterial activity of cuminaldehyde on food-bornepathogens, the bioactive component of essential oil from Cuminum cyminum L. collected in Thailand. J. Complement. Integr. Med.2019, 16, 1. [CrossRef]160. Ordoñez, A.A.; Ordoñez Rm Fau-Zampini, I.C.; Zampini Ic Fau-Isla, M.I.; Isla, M.I. Design and quality control of a pharmaceuticalformulation containing natural products with antibacterial, antifungal and antioxidant properties. Int. J. Pharm. 2009, 378, 51–58.[CrossRef]161. Bawazeer, S.; Rauf, A. In Vitro Antibacterial and Antifungal Potential of Amyrin-Type Triterpenoid Isolated from Datura metelLinnaeus. BioMed. Res. Int. 2021, 2021, 1543574. [CrossRef]162. Zorofchian, S.; Kadir, H.; Hassandarvish, P.; Tajik, H.; Abu Bakar, S.; Zandi, K. A Review on Antibacterial, Antiviral, andAntifungal Activity of Curcumin. BioMed. Res. Int. 2014, 2014, 186864. [CrossRef]163. Tanaka, H.; Atsumi, I.; Shirota, O.; Sekita, S.; Sakai, E.; Sato, M.; Murata, J.; Murata, H.; Darnaedi, D.; Chen, I.-S. Three newconstituents from the roots of Erythrina variegata and their antibacterial activity against methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus.Chem. Biodivers. 2011, 8, 476–482. [CrossRef] [PubMed]164. Tanaka, H.; Atsumi, I.; Hasegawa, M.; Hirata, M.; Sakai, T.; Sato, M.; Yamaguchi, R.; Tateishi, Y.; Tanaka, T.; Fukai, T. Two NewIsoflavanones from the Roots of Erythrina variegata. Nat. Prod. Commun. 2015, 10, 1934578X1501000330. [CrossRef]165. Sato, M.; Tanaka, H.; Yamaguchi, R.; Kato, K.; Etoh, H. Synergistic effects of mupirocin and an isoflavanone isolated from Erythrinavariegata on growth and recovery of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. Int. J. Antimicrob. Agents 2004, 24, 241–246. [CrossRef][PubMed]166. Camacho-Corona, M.D.R.; Ramírez-Cabrera, M.A.; Santiago, O.G.; Garza-González, E.; Palacios, I.d.P.; Luna-Herrera, J. Activityagainst drug resistant-tuberculosis strains of plants used in Mexican traditional medicine to treat tuberculosis and other respiratorydiseases. Phytother. Res. PTR 2008, 22, 82–85. [CrossRef]167. Yeshi, K.; Wangchuk, P. Chapter 11—Essential oils and their bioactive molecules in healthcare. In Herbal Biomolecules in HealthcareApplications; Mandal, S.C., Nayak, A.K., Dhara, A.K., Eds.; Academic Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2022; pp. 215–237. [CrossRef]168. Nugraha, A.S.; Dayli, I.R.; Sukrisno Putri, C.P.Z.; Firli, L.N.; Widhi Pratama, A.N.; Triatmoko, B.; Untari, L.F.; Wongso, H.; Keller,P.A.; Wangchuk, P. Isolation of Antibacterial Depside Constituents from Indonesian Folious Lichen, Candelaria fibrosa. J. Biol. Act.Prod. Nat. 2022, 12, 24–32. [CrossRef]169. Maregesi, S.; Van Miert, S.; Pannecouque, C.; Feiz Haddad, M.H.; Hermans, N.; Wright, C.W.; Vlietinck, A.J.; Apers, S.; Pieters,L. Screening of Tanzanian Medicinal Plants against Plasmodium falciparum and Human Immunodeficiency Virus. Planta Med.2010, 76, 195–201. [CrossRef]Molecules 2022, 27, 7532 25 of 25170. Nethengwe, M. Antiplasmodial/Antipyretic activity of some Zulu medicinal plants. J. Med. Plants Res. 2012, 6, 1255–1262.[CrossRef]171. Reddy, R.C.; Vatsala, P.G.; Keshamouni, V.G.; Padmanaban, G.; Rangarajan, P.N. Curcumin for malaria therapy. Biochem. Biophys.Res. Commun. 2005, 326, 472–474. [CrossRef]172. Ali, A.; Sudi, S.; Sidek, H.; Embi, N.; Basir, R. The Antimalarial Effect of Curcumin Is Mediated by the Inhibition of GlycogenSynthase Kinase-3β. J. Med. Food 2016, 20, 152–161. [CrossRef]173. Kamaraj, C.; Kaushik, N.K.; Rahuman, A.A.; Mohanakrishnan, D.; Bagavan, A.; Elango, G.; Zahir, A.A.; Santhoshkumar, T.;Marimuthu, S.; Jayaseelan, C.; et al. Antimalarial activities of medicinal plants traditionally used in the villages of Dharmapuriregions of South India. J. Ethnopharmacol. 2012, 141, 796–802. [CrossRef]174. Sathiyamoorthy, P.; Lugasi-Evgi, H.; Schlesinger, P.; Kedar, I.; Gopas, J.; Pollack, Y.; Golan-Goldhirsh, A. Screening for cytotoxicand antimalarial activities in desert plants of the negev and bedouin market plant products. Pharm. Biol. 1999, 37, 188–195.[CrossRef]175. Herlina, T.; Supratman, U.; Soedjanaatmadja, U.; Subarnas, A.; Sutardjo, S.; Abdullah, N.; Hayashi, H. Anti-malarial compoundfrom the stem bark of Erythrina variegata. Indones. J. Chem. 2010, 9, 308–311. [CrossRef]