plantsReviewEthnobotany, Phytochemistry and PharmacologicalActivity of Kigelia africana (Lam.)Benth. (Bignoniaceae)Alice Nabatanzi 1,2,3,4,5,* , Sanah M. Nkadimeng 2 , Namrita Lall 3,6,7, John D. Kabasa 4and Lyndy J. McGaw 21 Department of Plant Sciences, Microbiology and Biotechnology, College of Natural Sciences,Makerere University, Kampala 00256, Uganda2 Phytomedicine Programme, Department of Paraclinical Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Science,University of Pretoria, Onderstepoort 0110, South Africa; sanah.nkadimeng@up.ac.za (S.M.N.);lyndy.mcgaw@up.ac.za (L.J.M.)3 Department of Plant and Soil Sciences, University of Pretoria, Hatfield 0028, South Africa;namrita.lall@up.ac.za4 College of Veterinary Medicine, Animal Resources and Biosecurity, Makerere University,Kampala 00256, Uganda; kabasa@covab.mak.ac.ug5 Future Africa, University of Pretoria, Hatfield 0028, South Africa6 School of Natural Resources, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211, USA7 College of Pharmacy, JSS Academy of Higher Education and Research, Mysuru, Karnataka 570015, India* Correspondence: alicen@cns.mak.ac.ug or alice2nabatanzi@gmail.com; Tel.: +256-782-036497Received: 13 April 2020; Accepted: 23 May 2020; Published: 15 June 2020Abstract: Kigelia africana has been used in the management of human ailments since time immemorial.Ethnobotanists have documented the traditional uses of K. africana, which include treatment of skindisorders, cancer and gynecological complaints, among others. This has interested scientists, who haveexamined K. africana plant parts for their bioactivity. This review provides an insightful understandingon the ethnobotany, phytochemistry and pharmacology of K. africana. Web search engines Googleand Google Scholar, as well as the databases of PubMed, Scopus, JSTOR, HINARI, SID, AJOL andSpringer Link, were exhaustively searched using key words and phrases. Institutional reportsand conference papers were also consulted. A total of 125 relevant international literature sourcesmeeting the inclusion criteria were included. Kigelia africana has biologically active phytochemicals,many of which have been isolated. Whilst the fruits are most often cited in pharmacological studies,other plant parts are also used in herbal preparations. Commercially available products have beenformulated from K. africana, though many have not been fully standardized. Despite many effortsby researchers to scientifically validate traditional uses of K. africana, many remain merely claims,thus the need to conduct more research, scientifically validate other traditional uses, isolate newbioactive phytochemicals and standardize K. africana products.Keywords: Kigelia africana; phytochemistry; traditional uses; pharmacological activity; Bignoniaceae1. IntroductionTraditional medicine (TM) plays a very significant role in indigenous health care systems forhumans, especially in developing countries where access to allopathic medicines and practitionersis limited. Throughout Africa, communities have relied on TM for centuries, because it is easy toaccess, is culturally appropriate and is considered safe. The practice of TM includes explicit practicesthat exploit materials from plants, animals and inorganic materials (e.g., soils) and implicit methodsPlants 2020, 9, 753; doi:10.3390/plants9060753 www.mdpi.com/journal/plantsPlants 2020, 9, 753 2 of 35that include libations to spirits. Plant materials from medicinal plants find the widest applicationin TM preparations [1]. In turn, this has threatened the plant species from which such materialsare sourced. Furthermore, most of the plant resources are threatened by unsustainable harvesting,habitat modification and conversion [2]. Kigelia africana (Lam.) Benth. is one of those tree speciesthat have been heavily exploited for their medicinal, religious and cultural values [3]. It belongsto family Bignoniaceae and is the only species in the genus Kigelia. Bignoniaceae is the trumpetcreeper or catalpa family of the mint order of flowering plants (Lamiales). It contains about 110 generaand more than 800 species of trees, shrubs and, most commonly, vines, chiefly of tropical America,tropical Africa and the Indo-Malayan region. Kigelia africana is endemic to Africa and distributedthroughout the continent but does not occur in Mauritania, São Tomé and Principe and the IndianOcean Islands [4,5]. Kigelia africana has several synonyms, some of which include: Kigelia pinnata (Jacq.)DC., Bignonia africana Lam., Crescentia pinnata Jacq., Kigelia abyssinica A. Rich., Kigelia aethiopica Decne.,Kigelia aethiopum (Fenzl) Dandy, Kigelia erytraeae Mattei, Kigelia ikbaliae De Wild., Kigelia somalensisMattei, Kigelia acutifolia Engl. ex Sprague, Kigelia elliotii Sprague, Kigelia elliptica Sprague, Kigelia impressaSprague, Kigelia spragueana Wernham, Kigelia talbotii Hutch. & Dalziel, Tanaecium pinnatum (Jacq.) Willd.and Tecoma africana (Lam.) G. Don). The common name of K. africana is “sausage tree”, which is derivedfrom the shape of its fruits, which look like a sausage. This tree species grows mostly in the wild inwet areas along watercourses, in riverine fringes, alluvial and open woodlands, high-rainfall savannas,shrublands and in rain forests [6,7]. It occurs on loamy red clay soils, sometimes rocky, damp or peaty,from sea level up to 3000-m altitudes. Although local communities tend to protect K. africana saplingswhile in the wild, enabling them grow to maturity, this tree is sometimes domesticated and most oftenpropagated by seeds [8].The local names of K. africana vary throughout Africa due to the ethnic and cultural diversityon the continent. The many dialects reflect K. africana’s ethnobotanical significance among severalAfrican communities [9]. Some of K. africana’s local African names include: Nufuten, Nanaberetee(Ashanti and Akwapem), Etua (Fante), Blimmo (Baule), Akpele (Ga), Lele (Adanme), Nyakpe (Ewe),Rawuya (Hausa), Jilahi (Fulani), Bulungu (Kanuri), Bechi (Nupe), Pandoro (Yoruba), Ugbongbon (Bini),Uturubein (Ibo), Abu Shutor, Abu Sidra, Um Shutur, Umm Hashatur (Arabic), Rangbarabgbo (Zande),muVeve (Tonga), muVumati (Ndau), muZunguru (KalanBa), mPolota (Lozi), umBvewe, iPfungwani,muBvee (Shona, Zezuru, Manyika), Mufungufungu (Bemba and Lozi), ~lunguli (Lozi) Muzungule(Lozi and Tonga), Kufungule (Kaonde) Ifungufungu, Mufunofuno (Lunda), Chizutu, Mvula, Mvunguti(Nyanja). Muratina, (Kikuyu and Meru), Muatini, Kiatine (Kamba), Hwasini, Mvongonia (Teita),Ol-Suguroi, Ol-Darpoi (Masai), Yago (Luo), Morabe (Kakamega), Mvungunya, Mvungavunga, Hwegea,Mwicha, Mranaa (Swahili), Muratini (Gitiama), Mukisha (Taveta), Ratiunet (Nandi), Ratiunet (Kipsigi),Sheole (Boni), Modukguhlu (Sepedi), Muvevha (Venda), Worsboom (Afrikaans), Hantsar giiwaa(Hausa), Yago (Acholi), Edodoi (Ateso), Sifungu (Lugisu), Naizungwe (Lusoga), Omusa (Luganda),Roti (Pokot) and Bukuraal (Somalia). The many traditional medicinal uses of K. africana have attractedsignificant scientific interest in the species’ pharmacological activity.Although many in vitro efficacy studies of K. africana have been reported by several researchers,more work needs to be done to clinically prove K. africana’s efficacy in vivo before clinical applications.This paper summarizes the current information on the traditional uses and pharmacological andcommercial significances of K. africana.2. MethodsDatabases of PubMed, Scopus, JSTOR, Mendeley, Scientific Information Database (SID), HINARI,Springer Link and African Journals OnLine (AJOL) were searched, in addition to Google Scholar.Institutional reports, student theses, educational newspaper articles, educational magazines andconference papers were also consulted. “Kigelia africana”, “Kigelia pinnata”, “phytochemicals”,“traditional uses”, “K. africana products”, “biological activity”, “pharmacological activity” and “Africa”were the keywords used in the web search engines. Nonetheless, other phrases reflecting subjects ofPlants 2020, 9, 753 3 of 35interest were used. During the search process, the keywords were used in a variety of combinations,which included synonyms, alternative terminologies, alternative spelling, related terms and variationsin word endings. Boolean operators, viz., “AND”, “OR”, “-”, “NOT” and “+” were used to combineand exclude terms when searching within Google and Google Scholar. Wildcard operators, viz., (*),(?), (~) and (!) were used when searching the databases. Examples of topics explored include:traditional medicine, indigenous knowledge, medicinal plants, antifungal activity, antibacterial activity,antiplasmodial activity, analgesic activity, anti-inflammatory activity, antioxidants, anticancer activity,toxicity, commercial products, Kigelia africana, botany and ethnobotany, among others. The searchwas conducted over a five-month period and included references published up until January 2020.All publications resulting from these searches were screened, and pertinent records were collatedusing Mendeley, a web-based bibliography database manager. Both in vitro and in vivo studies wereincluded. All documents that met the inclusion criteria of the review paper were retrieved andevaluated by the authors. While the authors strove to identify all pertinent documents, some literaturemay have been inadvertently omitted, such as unpublished student theses, conference proceedingsand grey literature. Inclusion criteria for this review included: (1) English-language documents,(2) published primary and secondary literatures, (3) published student theses, (4) newspaper articlesand (5) technical reports. While K. africana’s significance in the traditional indigenous system ofAfrica was the primarily focus of the review, studies carried out on K. africana outside Africa werealso included.3. Results and DiscussionAn overview of the four topic areas that are presented in this section: (1) botanical description of K.africana, (2) ethnobotany, (3) phytochemistry of K. africana and (4) pharmacological activity of K. africana.3.1. Botanical DescriptionKigelia africana (Lam.) Benth. syn. Kigelia pinnata belongs to the family Bignoniaceae and is theonly species in the genus Kigelia [10]. The generic name Kigelia comes from the Mozambican namefor sausage tree, “kigeli-keia”. Kigelia africana is native to Africa, thus the derivation of the speciesname “africana”. The tree is deciduous, with a rounded crown, thick trunk, dark-grey to light-brown,scaly slash creamy-white with a green edge, low-branching, branches and branchlets spreading andlenticellate [11]. The tree reaches maturity within four to six years, with a height of up to 24 meters [11].The leaves are alternate, pinnate and stipules absent; rachis up to 50 cm long; leaflets three to sixopposite pairs, usually with a terminal leaflet, elliptic to elongated lanceolate, 7–20 cm long, 4–12 cmwide, apex abruptly to gradually shortly acuminate, base slightly asymmetrical, rounded to cuneate,margins entire or sometimes slightly toothed, coriaceous or papyraceous, shiny green and usually scabrid above, dull green and glabrous to tomentose below; midrib impressed above, major lateral veins7–12 pairs and prominent below [11]. The flowers of K. africana are hermaphrodite, zygomorphic andfive-merous. The calyx is campanulate approximately 1–4-cm-long, 1–2-cm-wide, fleshy, irregularlyfive-lobed, the lower lobes generally longer at maturity and the calyx mouth thus oblique. The corollais greenish-yellow to purplish-red or bright claret, 5–12-cm-long, the throat rather abruptly expanded,limb 9–18 across with the two upper lobes smaller than the three lower and velvety inside; stamens fourfertile and one staminode about half the fertile stamens. The ovary is conical, tapering into a slenderstyle subequalling the stamens [12–16]. They possess a very unpleasant scent, which is most notableat night, indicating their reliance on pollination by bats, which visit them for pollen and nectar [16].The fruits are indehiscent, woody, greyish-brown, sausage-shaped and pendulous, up to 50-cm-longand 15 cm in diameter, with elongated pedicels. The seeds are numerous, unwinged, obovate and1.25-cm-long [12–15]. The fruits usually weigh 10 kg [4]. The mature fruits can be found on treesthroughout the year [6,16]. Although not eaten by humans, they find wide applications in traditionalmedicine [11]. Due to the unusual fruits and large attractive flowers, K. africana is considered a strikingornamental plant, and the fruits are used as florists’ materials. The thick stem is an attractive featurePlants 2020, 9, 753 4 of 35for bonsai. The tree is sometimes planted as a boundary marker but usually at roadsides and for shade.Due to its occurrence along watercourses, it is suitable for erosion control and riverbank stabilization.3.2. EthnobotanyPlant species in the Bignoniaceae family play a central role in traditional medicine systems [17],and K. africana is no exception. The preparation and use of K. africana plant parts in traditional medicinediffers across and within communities. Despite the differences in preparation and application, there isstill a lot of overlap, viz., similar uses in different regions or countries. Kigelia africana has interestedmany ethnobotanists and cultural anthropologists across the world who have intensively engaged indocumenting its uses in several communities. The fruits are used in ethnoveterinary medicine to treatdigestive system disorders, leg edemas, dermal irritations and infections, mastitis, retained placenta,brucellosis and Newcastle disease. The tree provides a nutritious food source during times of famine:the hard seeds are roasted and eaten. The fruit pulp, however, is said to be inedible and toxic, may haveintoxicant or purgative effects and may cause blistering of the tongue and skin. However, fallen fruits,along with leaves and flowers, are browsed or foraged by livestock and game [10]. Fruits and bark arein the brewing process to aid fermentation and enhance the flavor of traditional beers. Kigelia africanawood is considered excellent for dugout canoes, planks and fenceposts. It is also used for making boxes,drums, stools, yokes, tool handles, mortars and large bowls for watering cattle. Weapon bows are madefrom branches, and smaller branches are hollowed to administer enemas to children [15]. Wood andfruits are carved into mousetraps, dolls and various items of crockery and cutlery. The wood is used asfuel. A black dye is obtained from the tannin-rich fruit pulp. Kigelia africana is regarded as sacred inmany regions [10], and the flowers and fruits are regarded as a fetish. Fruits are commonly sold inmarkets as charms to promote wealth and prosperity, to impart strength and courage on warriors priorto, to increase crop yields and as a fetish for fecundity or to avert whirlwinds. The fruits and bark ofK. africana are collected and traded locally in marketplaces.Fruits are the most frequently used plant part in traditional medicine preparations, followed by thestem bark, roots and leaves [18]. Flowers are quite infamous and rarely used as medicine, because theyare seasonal, and when they bloom, within 14 days, they fall off the tree and dry. Thus, seasonality affectstheir wide application in traditional medicine preparations, coupled with the short life cycle. The fruitsare never consumed fresh, because they are said to be very poisonous, especially when young [19].Whereas K. africana is traditionally considered potent, its pharmacological activity cannot be attributedto it as a single species, in some cases. Table 1 shows that some traditional medicine preparationsinvolve using K. africana in combination with other medicinal plants or mollusks, like snails, or otherfoods, like porridge. This implies that these factors should be taken into consideration when examiningits pharmacological activity. Unfortunately, the traditional uses of K. africana have threatened itsexistence on the African continent. The traditional uses of K. africana in different African communities,regions and countries, together with the plant part used, are summarized in Table 1.3.3. PhytochemistryWhereas several compounds have been identified from K. africana, more studies are required tofully characterize its phytochemistry [45]. According to Table 2, iridoids and quinones have beenidentified in all plant parts. The stem bark has a higher diversity of phytochemicals compared to otherplant parts. Alkanes are common in the leaves. Table 2 shows that not much has been done to identifyphytochemicals in Kigelia flowers, which relates to their low degree of usage in traditional medicinepreparations. Kigelia flowers are very attractive, thus finding wider applications as ornamentals.Monoterpenoid naphthoquinones (pinnatal, isopinnatal, kigelinol and isokigelinol) are unique toK. africana. Table 2 shows the classes of phytochemicals in Kigelia africana, the phytochemicals thereinand the plant parts in which the respective phytochemicals are found.Plants 2020, 9, 753 5 of 35Table 1. Traditional uses of Kigelia africana (Lam.) Benth. in Africa.Region/Country Plant Part/Preparations Traditional Use ReferenceSouth AfricaFruitsSolar keratosis, malignant melanoma, dysentery, worm infestations,pneumonia, toothache, malaria, diabetes, venereal diseases, convulsions,antidote for snakebite, postparturition hemorrhage,solar keratoses and skin cancer[3,6,9,11,20,21]Roasted seeds Pneumonia, fungal infections, eczema, malaria, diabetes and waist pain [6,22]Stem and root bark Ulcers, pneumonia and toothache [23]South Africa and Zimbabwe Fruits Crude fruit creams for freckles [24]South Africa and EthiopiaHot root macerate Gynecological complaints, constipation and tapeworm infections [6]Root bark Uterine cancer, venereal diseases, hemorrhoids and rheumatism [6,25]Stem bark Rheumatism, dysentery, venereal diseases, gynecological conditions,hemorrhages, epilepsy, wounds, sores, abscesses, diarrhea and edema [6]South Africa and Cameroon Stem bark decoction mixed in porridge Infertility [23,26]South Africa and NamibiaStem and leaves decoction Eczema and herpes [27]Fruits and stem bark decoction Worm infections in children [22]Zambezi Valley Fruits Crude fruit cosmetic preparation used by Tsonga women, dressing forulcers, purgative and galactagogue [22,23]Zambia Bark Syphilis and gonorrhea [23]Botswana Fruits boiled with milk Sexually transmitted diseases [22]Plants 2020, 9, 753 6 of 35Table 1. Cont.Region/Country Plant Part/Preparations Traditional Use ReferenceWest Africa (general)Leaves Gastrointestinal ailments [22,28]Bark water macerate Antidote for snakebite, sores, skin fungal infections, dysentery and syphilis [29,30]Ground bark and fruit infusion Stomach problems in children [22]Root and bark Pneumonia, tapeworms, ulcers and gynecological complaints [15,22,31]Fruits Wounds, abscesses, antimalaria, febrile jaundice and menorrhagia [27,32]Aqueous bark extract Backache, stomach pains and dysentery [32]Leaves and twigs Constipation, gynecological disorders, hemorrhoids, lumbago, dysentery,wounds kidney disorders, snakebite and rheumatism [22,27]Leaves Stomach and kidney ailments, antidote for snakebites and wounds[16,27]Stem and twigsWounds, antidote for snakebites, rheumatism,stomach and kidney ailmentsFruits, roots and leaves Sexual complaints, viz., poor libido, sexual asthenia and impotenceFruitsDermatitis—fruit ointment, constipation, gynecological disorders,hemorrhoids, psoriasis, eczema, diarrhea, malaria, rheumatism, retainedplacenta, dressing for wounds, purgative, galactagogue and dizziness[16,22,25,33,34]Bark Antimicrobial, cytotoxicity and anti-implantation activities [3,22,35,36]Cameroon Stem bark decoction Abortifacient, filariasis and cataract [22]Ghana Bark preparation Dysentery and rheumatism [37]Togo Fruits Cancer [9]Ivory Coast Fruit infusion Rheumatism and back pains [22]Benin, Ivory Coast,and South Africa Leaf decoction Jaundice [6]NigeriaBark Anti-inflammatory, dysentery and anticancer [5,12,37]Fruits Psoriasis, eczema, leprosy, rheumatism, snakebites, syphilis and chronicabdominal pain [38,39]Root decoction Ante and postnatal disorders, fibroid and conception [6]Fruits and flowers mixed with alcoholor water Fertility treatment among women and men of childbearing age [36]Leaves Diarrhea, abortifacient, aphrodisiac, tonic and impotence [40]Plants 2020, 9, 753 7 of 35Table 1. Cont.Region/Country Plant Part/Preparations Traditional Use ReferenceCentral Africa Unripe fruit Dressing for wounds, hemorrhoids and rheumatism [6,39]Kenya Roasted seeds mixed with beer Enlargement of sexual organs [23,38]Kenya, Embu community Fruits Cold, flu, inflammation and dysentery [41]TanzaniaStem bark infusion Hyperpyrexia and gonorrhea [6]Fruits boiled Anemia, especially in pregnant womenEast and West Africa Bark Convulsions [9]Tanzania and Nigeria Hot decoction of stem bark Galactagogue [26]Africa (general)Bark decoction Laxative [27]Ash leaves mixed with honey High blood pressure [22]FruitsMature fruit is used for treating wounds, abscesses, dressing wounds,skin cancer, reducing breast metastasis, ulcers, syphilis, rheumatism,fungal infections, boils, psoriasis, leprosy, venereal diseases and acne[3,14,22,23,27,35,42]Leaves Malaria, rheumatism, wounds, ulcers, retained placenta, venereal diseasesand diarrhea [43]Fruit and bark (lesser extent) extracts Dysentery, hemorrhoids, constipation, wounds, ulcers, boils, abscesses,rheumatism, syphilis and gonorrhea [30,33]Fruit and root decoction Postparturition hemorrhage[44]Stem bark decoction of K. africana and theleaves of Irvingia gabonensis Spleen infectionPowdered fruit mixed with palm oil DizzinessLeaves and stem bark decoction MalariaDecoction (stem bark of K. africana andleaves of Cassia occidentalis and potash) Gonorrhea and syphilisMixture of ground K. africana young fruitand snails rolled into balls and allowed todry is eaten with a cup of tea every dayInfertilityBark Rheumatism, regularizing menstrual flow, epilepsy and dysenteryStem bark paste mixed with palm oil and salt Expelling retained placentaPlants 2020, 9, 753 8 of 35Table 1. Cont.Region/Country Plant Part/Preparations Traditional Use ReferenceAfrica (general)Beer from fruit extract Children’s bath for the treatment of measles [22]Stem bark and root decoction Blood cleansing and pelvic pains during pregnancyKigelia and Searsia nebulosa stem bark decoction Dysmenorrhea [26]Kigelia africana, Hypoxis hemerocallidea andSenecio serratuloides leaves and roots decoction Sexually transmitted infections and sores [23]Table 2. Phytochemicals in Kigelia africana (Lam.) Benth. responsible for its pharmacological activity.Classification Phytochemicals Plant Part ReferencePhenolic Compoundsp-Coumaric acid Stem bark, fruits, roots [14,46,47]Caffeic acid Stem bark, fruits, roots [14,46]Ferulic acid Stem bark, fruits [11,35,47–50]Atranorin Stem bark [51]Nonacosanoic acid, 2-(4-hydroxyphenyl) ethyl ester Stem bark [14,46]Luteolin Roots, leaves, wood [12,42]Luteolin 7-O-glucoside Leaves [35]6-hydroxyluteolin Roots, leaves, wood [42]6-p-coumaroyl-sucrose Fruits [52]Kigeliol Wood [11,47,50,52]Balaphonin Stem bark [3,6,12,42,53]CoumarinsKigelin Roots, stem bark, leaves, wood [14]8-hydroxy-6, 7-dimethoxy-3-methyl-3, 4-dihydroisocoumarin Roots [11,50]Isokigelin Stem bark [52,53]6-DemethylkigelinRoots, stem bark [52]6-Methoxymellein1,3-dimethylkigelin Stem bark [11,12,46]Plants 2020, 9, 753 9 of 35Table 2. Cont.Classification Phytochemicals Plant Part ReferenceSterolsβ-Sitosterol Stem bark, fruits, heartwood, roots [14,50,53,54]Stigmasterol Stem bark, roots, heartwood [3,54,55]γ-sitosterol Stem bark, fruits [3,47]TriterpenesOleanolic acidStem bark [3,14,46,51]Pomolic acid2β,3β,19α-Trihydroxy-urs-12-en-28-oic acidDiterpenes Phytol Leaves [56]3-Hydro-4,8-phyteneUnsaturated Fatty acids(9Z,12Z)-Methyl octadeca-9,12-dienoate Leaves [56]Vernolic acid Stem bark, roots, leaves, heartwood [3,12,42]Methyl-12-methyltetradecanoate Leaves [3,35]Palmitic acid or hexadecanoic acid Leaves, flowers [52]QuinonesLapachol Stem bark, fruits, roots, heartwood [14,35,46,48]Dehydro α-lapachone Stem bark, fruits, roots, heartwood [14,52,53]2-acetylfuro-1,4-naphthoquinone Stem bark [14,46,48]Kigelinol Stem bark, roots, fruits [14,46]Kigelinone Stem bark [49,57,58]Isokigelinol Roots, stem bark, roots, fruits [3,41]Pinnatal Roots, fruits, stem bark [47,49,57,58]Isopinatal Roots and fruits, stem bark [49,54,57]Norviburtinal Root bark, stem bark, fruits [12,47,59]Sonovoburtinal Root bark [47]2-(1-Hydroxyethyl)-naphtho[2,3-b] furan-4,9-quinone Roots, stem bark [58]Kigelinone Root and fruit, stem bark, heartwood [48,54]2-acetylnaphtho[2,3-b] furan-4,9-quinone Stem bark, roots [3]2-(1-hydroxyethyl) naphtho [2,3-b] furan-4,9-dione Stem bark, roots [3]Tecomaquinone-I Heartwood [60]Kojic acid Stem bark [46]Plants 2020, 9, 753 10 of 35Table 2. Cont.Classification Phytochemicals Plant Part ReferenceIridoids7-Hydroxyviteoid IIFruits [11,60–62]7-hydroxy-10-deoxyeucommiol10-DeoxyeucommiolJiofuran3-(2-hydroxyethyl)-5-(2-hydroxypropyl)-4,5-dihydrofuran-2(3H)-one7-hydroxyeucommic acid7-hydroxy eucommiolTwig, roots, leaves, wood [3,62]Jioglutolide1-Dehydroxy-3,4-dihydroaucubigeninDes-p-hydroxy benzoyl kisasagenol BAjugol6-Trans-caffeoyl ajugolVerminoside Stem bark, fruits, twigs leaves, roots [12,22,23,28,36,49,61–63]Specioside Stem bark [49,62,64]Minecoside Stem bark [11]Alkanesn-hentriacontaneLeaves[11]11-(2,2-dimethylpropyl) heneicosane2,6,10-trimethyldodecane4,4-dimethylundecane [3,35]1-iodohexadecane[35]1-iododecaneTritriacontane[62]HentriacontaneNonacosaneHeneicosane [11]Plants 2020, 9, 753 11 of 35Table 2. Cont.Classification Phytochemicals Plant Part ReferenceEstersPentafluoro-N-heptadecyl Leaves[11]2-ethylhexyloctadecyl sulfurous acid Leaves2-(4-hydroxyphenyl) ethyl ester Bark [14]Ethyl linoleoate Leaves, flowers [52]Plants 2020, 9, 753 12 of 353.4. Pharmacological Activity of Kigelia africanaMany researchers who have investigated the pharmacological activity of K. africana have relied ona known traditional use or ethnobotanical application [12]. On the other hand, some pharmacologicaluses have been serendipitously discovered in laboratories. While many traditional uses have not beensubstantiated in the laboratory, quite a number have proven positive through comprehensive clinicaltrials. In turn, products or drug leads have been discovered.3.4.1. Antibacterial and Antifungal ActivityRoasted seeds, bark and fruit extracts of K. africana are traditionally used to treat fungal andbacterial infections (Table 1). Of the three plant parts, fruit extracts have found the widest applicationsin the treatment of fungal and bacterial skin infections. This may justify their wider usage in skincare formulations. In clinical microbiology, bacterial and fungal susceptibility tests are of paramountimportance, as they help detect possible efficacy or resistance of common pathogens to the drug beingtested [65]. Therefore, results of susceptibility tests are not an end and should always be followed byin vivo studies. This review reported susceptibility tests by Hussain et al. [16] and Arkhipov et al. [45].The in vitro antibacterial activity of K. africana ethanolic, n-hexane and aqueous leaf, fruit andbark extracts against Staphylococcus aureus, Proteus vulgaris, Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas aeruginosa,Klebsiella pneumoniae and Citrobacter amalonaticus using the agar disc diffusion method has beeninvestigated [16]. The experimental controls were oxytetracycline (positive control), n-hexane andethanol (negative controls). The ethanolic leaf extract showed maximum activity against E. coli (22 mm)and moderate activity against P. vulgaris and P. aeruginosa, respectively. Klebsiella pneumoniae andC. amalonaticus showed resistance with no inhibition zones. For the aqueous leaf extract, maximumantibacterial activity was observed against C. amalonaticus (7 mm) and moderate activity againstS. aureus (5 mm), P. aeruginosa (4 mm) and P. vulgaris (4 mm). Klebsiella pneumoniae showed resistanceto the aqueous leaf extract, with no inhibition zone. Oxytetracycline showed a significant zone ofinhibition against S. aureus (20 mm) and least activity against K. pneumoniae, while moderate valueswere observed against the rest of the bacterial strains.The n-hexane leaf extract of K. africana exhibited maximum activity against P. vulgaris (6 mm),with minimum activity against S. aureus (2 mm). K. pneumoniae, P. aeruginosa, C. amalonaticus andE. coli showed resistance with no inhibition zones. The aqueous K. africana fruit extract had thehighest inhibition against P. vulgaris (6 mm) and C. amalonaticus. It showed moderate inhibition ofS. aureus and E. coli. Klebsiella pneumoniae and P. aeruginosa were resistant, with no zone of inhibition.With oxytetracycline, the largest zone of inhibition was observed against E. coli and P. vulgaris (23 mm)and minimum against C. amalonaticus. Zones produced by the fruit of K. africana against all bacterialstrains were highly significant.The bark extract of K. africana prepared with different solvents possessed good antibacterialactivity against E. coli and minimum antibacterial activity against K. pneumoniae. The ethanol extractof K. africana bark had good antibacterial activity against E. coli (10 mm), moderate activity againstP. aeruginosa and P. vulgaris and the lowest activity against S. aureus (1 mm), while K. pneumoniaeand C. amalonaticus were resistant, with no zones of inhibition. With the n-hexane extract, K. africanabark produced resistance against all bacterial strains except C. amalonaticus (4 mm) and E. coli (2 mm).The aqueous bark extract of K. africana showed a maximum zone of inhibition against S. aureus (15 mm).A small zone of inhibition (5 mm) was observed against P. aeruginosa and P. vulgaris. The smallestinhibition zone was formed against C. amalonaticus, while K. pneumoniae and E. coli were resistant.Oxytetracycline showed the largest zone of inhibition in the cases of S. aureus (25 mm) and E. coli (20 mm).The smallest zone of inhibition was observed against C. amalonaticus (3 mm). Ethanolic and aqueousextracts of bark and leaves of K. africana showed remarkable activity against the bacterial strains ascompared to n-hexane. S. aureus and E. coli were proved as highly sensitive strains, while K. pneumoniaewas the resistant strain, as the extracts formed no inhibition zone against it.Plants 2020, 9, 753 13 of 35Hussain et al. [16] employed the agar disc diffusion method, which has its own limitations.First, some species of bacteria cannot be tested accurately using this method. This implies that,before a researcher chooses which method to use for antibacterial susceptibility assays, they shouldbe well-conversant with the class of bacteria they are dealing with. These may either be fastidiousor nonfastidious bacteria. According to The European Committee on Antimicrobial SusceptibilityTesting (EUCAST), fastidious bacteria will only grow well if special nutrients are present in the culturemedium, viz., BD Mueller Hinton Fastidious Agar. Fastidious bacteria include Streptococci spp.,Neisseria gonorrhoeae, Haemophilus influenzae, Moraxella catarrhalis, Listeria monocytogenes, Pasteurella spp.,Kingella kingae, Aerococcus spp., Campylobacter spp., Legionella spp., Brucella spp., Francisella tularensis,Leptospira spp., Borrelia burgdorferi, Bartonella spp. and Bordetella spp. to mention but a few.Nonfastidious bacteria can grow without special nutritional supplements on agar plates. These includeBacillus spp., Staphylococcus spp., Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas spp., Klebsiella spp. and Citrobacter spp.Therefore, whereas the same minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) method may be applied, slightmodifications, especially in culture media, are a must when dealing with fastidious bacteria.In another study, Arkhipov et al. [45] investigated the antibacterial and antifungal activities ofK. africana fruit powder against 19 bacterial species, viz., Acintobacter bayleii, Aeromonas hydrophila,Alcaligenes feacalis, Bacillus cereus, Citrobacter freundii, Enterobacter aerogenes, Enterococcus faecalis,Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Penicillium chrysogenum, Proteus mirabilis, Pseudomonas aeruginosa,Pseudomonas fluorescens, Salmonella newport, Serratia marcescens, Shigella sonnei, Staphylococcus aureus,Staphylococcus epidermidis and Streptococcus pyogenes and three fungal species, viz., Aspergillus niger,Candida albicans and Penicillium chrysogenum using modified disc diffusion and MIC methods. Standarddiscs of ampicillin (2 µg) and nystatin (100 µg) served as positive controls for antibacterial andantifungal activity, respectively. Filter discs impregnated with 10 µL of distilled water served asnegative controls.The methanol and water extracts displayed broad spectrum inhibitory activity againstGram-negative bacteria (A. bayleii, A. hydrophila, A. faecalis, C. freundii, E. aerogenes, E. coli, K. pneumoniae,P. mirabilis, P. aeruginosa, P. fluorescens, S. newport, S. marcescens and S. sonnei), inhibiting the growth ofnine (69%) and eight (62%) of the four Gram-negative species tested, respectively. The methanol extractwas generally more effective at inhibiting Gram-negative bacterial growth than was the aqueous extract.Proteus mirabilis was particularly susceptible, with zones of inhibition greater than 10 mm for themethanol, water and ethyl acetate extracts. The chloroform and hexane extracts were unable to inhibitany of the bacterial species tested. The ethyl acetate extract also displayed inhibitory activity towardsthe Gram-negative bacteria, albeit with a narrower specificity, inhibiting three of the four bacterialspecies (23%). Each inhibited the growth of three of the five species (60%). In contrast, the ethylacetate extract inhibited only S. epidermidis (20%). It is noteworthy that, whilst growth inhibitionwas detected for several Gram-positive bacteria, the zones of inhibition indicated that this inhibitionwas not particularly strong against any of these bacteria. None of the Gram-positive bacteria wereinhibited by the chloroform or hexane extracts.The methanol, water and ethyl acetate extracts showed broad growth inhibitory activity againstthe fungi tested (75%). Only P. chrysogenum was resistant to all the extracts. The methanol extractshowed the strongest inhibition to the growth of the fungi A. niger, C. albicans and P. chrysogenum,with MIC values of 1238, 841.2 and 989.7 µg/mL, respectively. The MIC values of the aqueous extractfor the fungi A. niger, C. albicans and P. chrysogenum were 2487, 2060 and 2768 µg/mL, respectively,while the MIC values of the ethyl acetate extract were 1463, 1278 and 1744 µg/mL for the fungi A. niger,C. albicans and P. chrysogenum, respectively. The methanol extract of the fruit of K. africana had aminimum fungicidal concentration of >1 g/mL; therefore, it was not active against C. neoformans [66].The authors diluted and tested the plant extracts across a concentration range of doses 5 mg/mL to0.1 mg/mL, which increases the reliability of the results. The iridoids specioside and verminoside inK. africana are responsible for its antibacterial effects [42].Plants 2020, 9, 753 14 of 35Arkhipov and colleagues mention using modified disc diffusion and MIC methods to determinethe antibacterial and antifungal activity [45]. Unfortunately, they do not go further to clearly statehow the methods were modified and why they had to modify these methods. This leaves the readerwondering whether the modification was to improve the method efficiency or to increase susceptibilityof the pathogens. Additionally, percentages of inhibition by the different species were stated, but theauthors did not clearly state how significant the inhibition was, which can only be achieved by statingthe statistical differences, which analyses were not performed. Furthermore, the authors frequentlyused terms like “majority”, “narrower specificity” and “strong”. These terms are difficult to interpret,as they were not accompanied by statistics in terms of significant differences among species and incomparison, with the controls across the different concentrations. This implies that a proper statisticalsoftware had to be used for analyses in order to make the results more meaningful.Whenever a researcher opts to use the disc diffusion method, it is of paramount importanceto use the correct media, appropriate controls, proper growth requirements and test conditions,among others [67,68]. Furthermore, with the disc diffusion method, one cannot ascertain the rightextract concentration-causing effect, since the amount of diffused extract cannot be accurately quantified.This implies that a researcher who chooses to use disc diffusion should confirm the results with agaror broth dilution tests, which are also able to indicate MIC values. Whereas Hussain et al. [16] andArkhipov et al. [45] stated the bacterial strains used in the respective studies, they did not mention thestrain collection numbers, which would be useful as a comparison with other studies. Strain collectionnumbers are recommended by the EUCAST (European Committee on Antimicrobial SusceptibilityTesting) for purposes of quality control [69] throughout the experiment. The EUCAST-recommendedstrain distributers include: ATCC (American Type Culture Collection, USA), NCTC (National Collectionof Type Cultures, UK), CIP (Collection de Institut Pasteur, France), DSM (Deutsche Stammsammlungfur Mikroorganismen und Zellkulturen, Germany), CCUG (The Culture Collection University ofGothenburg, Sweden) and CECT (Coleccion Espanola de Cultivos Tipo, Spain) [69]. Therefore,since strain collection numbers are not stated in these studies, it directly impacts on the reliability ofresults and reproducibility of the experiment.Gaps in these studies can be extrapolated to similar tests, as researchers always overlook the same.Whenever a drug or plant extract being tested has a good minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC),researchers usually conclude that the test drug has good antibacterial activity, which may not be right.This is because MIC results can only ascertain that the growth of bacteria under study is inhibited,but the pathogens may not be dead. Thus, there is a strong possibility that the bacteria will grow againif a conducive environment is provided. Additionally, it is often not known or determined whetherantimicrobial activity is due to a general toxicity to all cells or whether this is a selective activity againstthe bacteria or fungi.3.4.2. Analgesic and Anti-Inflammatory ActivityFor centuries, medicinal plants have been used to manage inflammation among several indigenouscommunities [70]. The roasted seeds, fruit infusion and bark of K. africana are traditionally used in thetreatment of waist pain, back pain and inflammation (Table 1). Many conventional anti-inflammatorydrugs work by inhibiting cyclooxygenase (COX), the enzyme that makes prostaglandins (PGs) [71].However, herbal medicines act via different pathways, one of which is by inhibiting nuclear factor-kB(NF-kB) inflammatory pathways [72]. NF-kB can detect noxious stimuli, such as infectious agents,cellular injuries and free radicals, and then promotes the synthesis of inflammatory cytokines. Inhibitionof NF-kB leads to the management of inflammation [73].Kamau [74] investigated the anti-inflammatory activity of the fresh stem bark and leaves ofK. africana using carrageenan-induced right paw edema in mice, as described by Winter et al. [75].Thirty Swiss albino mice of either sex were divided randomly into six groups of five mice eachand treated as follows; Group I (normal control) was not induced with paw edema but received4% dimethylsulphoxide (DMSO). Group II (negative control) was induced with paw edema andPlants 2020, 9, 753 15 of 35received 4% DMSO. Group III (positive control) was induced with paw edema and received diclofenac(reference drug) at a dose of 15 mg/kg body weight. Groups IV, V and VI (experimental groups) wereinduced with paw edema and received the extracts at a dosage of 50 mg/kg, 100 mg/kg and 150 mg/kgbody weight. Acute inflammation was induced by a subplantar injection of 0.05 mL 1% carrageenan(Sigma—type I) in normal saline 30 min after treatment. The change in paw diameter was measuredusing a digital Vernier caliper 30 min before the injection of carrageenan and at 1, 2, 3 and 4 h after theinduction of inflammation [76].The methanolic leaf extract of K. africana showed significant anti-inflammatory activity oncarrageenan-induced paw edema, which was demonstrated by the reduction in the inflamed hindpaw diameter after the extract administration. In the first hour, the leaf extract of K. africana at thedose of 150 mg/kg and reference drug diclofenac at the dosage of 15 mg/kg body weight showedanti-inflammatory effects by reducing the hind paw diameter by 0.21% and 1.10%, respectively.However, the extract at the dosages of 50 mg/kg and 100 mg/kg body weight showed noanti-inflammatory activity during the first hour. In the second hour, the leaf extract of K. africana at thedoses of 100 mg/kg and 150 mg/kg body weight, as well as diclofenac (reference drug), reduced theinflamed paw diameter by 0.42%, 1.42% and 2.8%, respectively. However, the extract at the dosageof 50 mg/kg body weight did not show anti-inflammatory activity currently. The anti-inflammatoryactivity of the extract at the dose levels of 50 mg/kg and 100 mg/kg showed no significant differences(p > 0.05).The anti-inflammatory activity of the extract at a dose of 150 mg/kg body weight was comparableto diclofenac (reference drug) (p > 0.05). In the third hour, the extract at the dose levels of 50 mg/kg,100 mg/kg and 150 mg/kg body weight, as well as diclofenac, reduced the inflamed hind paw diameterby 0.86%, 2.25%, 3.41% and 4.02%, respectively. The anti-inflammatory activity of the extract at thedosages of 50, 100 and 150 mg/kg body weight showed no significant differences and were comparableto the activity of diclofenac (p > 0.05). In the fourth hour, the leaf extract of K. africana at the dose levelsof 50, 100 and 150 mg/kg body weight reduced the inflamed hind paw diameter by 1.95%, 2.98% and4.98%, respectively. Similarly, the reference drug reduced the inflamed paw diameter by 4.43% atthis time. The anti-inflammatory activity of the extract at the dosages of 50 and 100 mg/kg bodyweight showed no significant difference (p > 0.05). In addition, the anti-inflammatory activity of theextract at 150 mg/kg body weight was comparable to that of diclofenac (p > 0.05). The concentrationof diclofenac was 15 mg/kg. The anti-inflammatory activity of the methanolic leaf and stem backextracts of K. africana was dose-dependent after the second hour of the test period, with the dose levelof 150 mg/kg body weight, producing the greatest anti-inflammatory activity. Thus, anti-inflammatoryactivity increased with an increase in the extract concentration, as evidenced by 150 mg/kg reducingthe hind paw diameter by 4.98% in the fourth hour, which was more effective than the referencedrug diclofenac.Namita et al. [77] investigated the analgesic properties of the K. africana methanolic leaf extractusing Wistar rats against the standard drug pentazocine (10 mg/kg) by hot plate and the tail flick method.Wistar rats were divided into four groups of five animals each. The control group received normalsaline (0.01 mL), group 2 (standard drug group) received pentazocine (10 mg/kg, i.p.), group 3 receivedK. africana methanolic leaf extract (200 mg/kg, p.o.) and group 4 received Kigelia methanolic leaf extract(400 mg/kg, p.o.). The extract (p < 0.001) prolonged the reaction time at different time intervals, and theeffect was dose-dependent. The analgesia began at 60 min, remained for 120 min and the peak effectwas noted at 90 min in comparison to the control. The higher dose of the extract (400 mg/kg) exhibitedbetter analgesic activity than the lower dose at (200 mg/kg), and the standard drug pentazocine(10 mg/kg, i.p.) showed highly significant analgesic activity (p < 0.001) in a dose-dependent manner.At 60 min, analgesia began, remained for 120 min and peak activity was noted at 90 min in comparisonto the control. Nonetheless, at extract dose of 200 mg/kg analgesia was produced at 60 min to 90 min.The standard drug pentazocine (10 mg/kg, i.p.) showed the highest significant effects. Accordingto Arkhipov et al. [45], verminoside is responsible for the analgesic and anti-inflammatory effects ofPlants 2020, 9, 753 16 of 35K. africana. Verminoside is known to cause significant anti-inflammatory effects, inhibiting both iNOSexpression and NO release in the Lipopolysaccharides-induced J774.A1 macrophage cell line [60].Kamau [76] showed that the methanolic leaf and stem bark extracts of K. africana canreduce carrageenan-induced right paw edema in mice, and extracts compare well with diclofenac(reference drug). Whereas Kamau [76] mentions using animals of either sex, the author does notstate the number of male and female animals used. Therefore, one cannot tell whether the effectsof the extracts are dependent on animal physiology and whether the responses to doses may differ.Furthermore, using the tail flick method to investigate the analgesic activity is quite deceptive, and theresults may have a different interpretation. This is majorly because the behavioral response in the tailflick test is consistent with the tail withdrawal response as a spinal reflex rather than an indication ofpain, involving higher brain centers [78]. More so, during this method, the rodent is always restrained,which may be against animal ethics if it takes a longer time.3.4.3. Antidiabetic ActivityThe use of K. africana fruit extracts as a treatment for diabetes is commonest among SouthAfrican indigenous communities (Table 1), notwithstanding other parts of Africa and the worldat large. Njogu et al. [42] investigated the antidiabetic activity of K. africana aqueous and ethylacetate extracts using male Swiss albino mice. Hyperglycemia was induced experimentally by asingle-dose intraperitoneal administration of 186.9 mg/kg body weight of a freshly prepared 10%alloxan monohydrate [79]. After forty-eight hours, mice with blood glucose levels above 200 mg/dLwere considered diabetic and used in this study. The mice were randomly divided into seven groups offive animals each. Group 1 consisted of normal mice either intraperitoneally or orally administered with0.1-mL physiological saline, group 2 consisted of alloxan-induced diabetic mice either intraperitoneallyor orally administered with 0.1-mL physiological saline, group 3a consisted of alloxan-induced diabeticmice intraperitoneally administered with 0.025 insulin units (0.25 insulin units in 1 mL) (1 IU/kgbody weight) in 0.1-mL physiological saline, group 3b consisted of alloxan-induced diabetic miceorally administered with 0.075-mg glibenclamide (0.75 mg in 1 mL) (3 mg/kg body weight) in 0.1-mLphysiological saline, group 4 consisted of alloxan-induced diabetic mice either intraperitoneally ororally administered with 1.25-mg extract (12.5 mg in 1-mL physiological saline) (50 mg/kg bodyweight) in 0.1-mL physiological saline, group 5 consisted of alloxan-induced diabetic mice eitherintraperitoneally or orally administered with 2.5-mg extract (25 mg-extract in 1-mL physiologicalsaline) (100 mg/kg body weight) in 0.1-mL physiological saline, group 6 consisted of alloxan-induceddiabetic mice administered with 5-mg extract (50-mg extract in 1-mL physiological saline) (200 mg/kgbody weight) in 0.1-mL physiological saline and group 7 consisted of alloxan-induced diabetic miceeither intraperitoneally or orally administered with 7.5-mg extract (75-mg extract in 1-mL physiologicalsaline) (300 mg/kg body weight) in 1-mL physiological saline. A volume of 0.1 mL of either insulinor glibenclamide or the plant extract solution was administered either intraperitoneally or orally toeach experimental mouse. The same experimental design was adapted for organic fractions, too.The selected dosages were calculated as 2 log doses between 50 and 300 mg/kg body weight basedon acceptable therapeutic doses for bioscreening. The alloxan-induced diabetic rats had a three tofour-fold increase in blood glucose relative to the normal control rats. The aqueous and ethyl acetateleaf extracts of K. africana showed a blood glucose-lowering effect when administered intraperitoneallyand orally, an indication that they contained hypoglycemic constituents.3.4.4. Antiprotozoal ActivityAccording to the latest World Malaria Report, released in November 2018, there were 219 millioncases of malaria in 2017, up from 217 million cases in 2016. The estimated number of malaria deathsstood at 435,000 in 2017, a similar number to the previous year [80]. The WHO African region carriesa disproportionately high share of the global malaria burden. In 2017, the region was home to 92%of malaria cases and 93% of malaria deaths [80]. The wood extract of K. africana has been reportedPlants 2020, 9, 753 17 of 35to possess antimalarial activity against drug-resistant strains of Plasmodium falciparum superior tothat of chloroquine and quinine [81]. Atawodi and Olowoniyi [60] reported the efficacy of hexane,dichloromethane, ethyl acetate and ethanol extracts of K. africana root bark against P. falciparum [82]and Trypanosoma brucei and Trypanosoma brucei rhodesiense [58], the causative organisms for malaria andsleeping sickness, respectively. Bharti et al. [61] also reported that the growth of Entamoeba histolyticawas inhibited by the stem bark butanol extract of K. africana. Four compounds exhibiting significantantiplasmodial activity were isolated from the ethyl acetate extract of K. africana. Three of the fourisolated compounds showed good activity against all the different parasite strains, the chloroquineresistant W-2 and two field isolates of P. falciparum, with IC50 < 5 µM. Specioside exhibited thehighest activity on W-2 (IC50 = 1.5 µM), followed by 2β, 3β, 19α-trihydroxyurs-12-en-28-oic acid(IC50 = 1.60 µM) and atranorin (IC50 = 4.41 µM), while p-hydroxycinnamic acid was the least active(IC50 = 53.84 µM) [48].Lapachol in the methanol extract of the root and a quinone obtained from the wood showedantimalarial activity. Three iridoids, specioside, verminoside and minecoside isolated from the butanolextract of the stem bark possess antiamoebic activity [83]. The antitrypanosome activity of the stembark and root bark extracts are attributed to 2-(1-hydroxyethyl)-naphtho-[2,3-b]-furan-4,9-quinone andthree naphthoquinoids: isopinnatal, kigelinol and isokigelinol [58].Akeng’a Ayuko et al. [84] investigated the antiplasmodial activity of K. africana chloroform,methanol and ethyl acetate extracts against two P. falciparum strains, viz., chloroquine (CQ)-sensitiveP. falciparum from Sierra Leone (D-6) and CQ-resistant P. falciparum from Vietnam (W-2). CQ wasused as a positive control. An in vitro semiautomated microdilution assay technique was used tomeasure the ability of K. africana to inhibit the incorporation of [G-3H] hypoxanthine into the malariaparasite [85,86]. Aliquots of the culture medium (25 µL) were added to all the wells of a 96-wellflat-bottomed microtiter plate. The test solutions (25 µL) were added in duplicate to the first wells,and a motorized hand diluter was used to make two-fold serial dilutions of each sample over a64-fold concentration range. The susceptibility tests were carried out with an initial 200 µL of parasiteculture (0.4% parasitemia and 1.5% hematocrit) in each well. The stock solutions of Kigelia extractswere diluted in the plate to give a 100-µg/mL concentration (as the highest concentration) and thendiluted two-fold, until reaching a concentration of 1.56 µg/mL. A suspension (200 µL, 1.5% v/v) ofparasitized erythrocytes (0.4% parasitemia) in the culture medium was added to all the test wells.Nonparasitized erythrocytes were used in control experiments. The plates were incubated at 37 ◦C inan atmosphere of 3% CO2, 5% O2 and 92% N2. After 48 h, each well was pulsed with 25 µL of culturemedium containing 0.5 µCi of [G-3H]-hypoxanthine, and the plates were incubated for a further 18 h.The contents of each plate were harvested onto glass fiber filters, washed thoroughly with distilledwater, dried and the radioactivity measured using a Beta-plate TM liquid scintillation counter (Wallac,Zurich, Switzerland). The activities of the crude extracts were grouped according to Deharo et al. [87].Thus, any extracts that showed an IC50 for antiplasmodial activity of less than 5 µg/mL were consideredactive, while those that had IC50 values from 5–10 µg/mL were considered moderately active, and thoseextracts with IC50 values over 10 µg/mL were considered inactive. The activities obtained indicatedthat there were differences in the strains’ sensitivities to the extracts. The chloroform, methanol andethyl acetate stem bark extracts of K. africana were found to be inactive in vitro with CQ-sensitiveIC50 values of 29.01 ± 0.78, 4.50 ± 0.04 and 25.77 ± 0.30, respectively, and had CQ-resistant IC50values of 16.79 ± 0.94, 22.63 ± 0.95 and 27.84 ± 1.29, respectively. Together with previous researchersreporting Kigelia as a good antiplasmodial agent, coupled with its common traditional use for malaria,this study is quite fascinating. Nonetheless, several factors affect the potency of a potentially activeplant extract when tested. These factors range from poor environmental conditions, poor harvestingand handling practices, wrong drying methods used, poor experimental design, poor extractant solventconcentrations and poor stock preparation, to mention but a few. Additionally, the degradation ofactive compounds during storage or the presence of prodrugs that undergo enzymatic transformationsin vivo to give active antiplasmodial compounds are also factors to consider [88].Plants 2020, 9, 753 18 of 353.4.5. Antiurolithiatic ActivityThe third-most common disorder of the urinary tract is urolithiasis after urinary tract infectionsand benign prostatic hyperplasia [89]. The worldwide incidence of urolithiasis is quite high, and despitetremendous advances in the field of medicine, there is no truly satisfactory drug for the treatmentof renal calculi [90]. Most patients still must undergo surgery to get rid of this painful disease.Hyperoxaluria is the main initiating factor for urolithiasis, and most calculi in the urinary systemarise from a common component in urine, e.g., calcium-oxalate (CaOx), representing up to 80% ofanalyzed stones [91]. In West Africa, K. africana leaves are used in the treatment of kidney ailments [16].This has been proven in various studies. According to the authors of [92], the aqueous K. africana fruitextract can alkalinize urine, making it less acidic. It has shown significant antiurolithiatic activity inthe dissolution of generated calcium oxalate crystals. Gupta et al. [93] reported that the antiurolithiaticactivity of K. africana fruit extract may possibly be mediated through the inhibition of calciumoxalate crystallization, making the extract curative, as well as having prophylactic uses in urolithiasis.In another study, the effect of the ethanolic extract of K. africana fruit on calcium oxalate urolithiasiswas studied in male Wistar albino rats. The ethylene glycol feeding resulted in hyperoxaluria, as wellas increased renal excretions of calcium, magnesium and phosphate. Supplementation with theethanolic extract of K. africana fruit significantly reduced the elevated urinary oxalate, uric acid andphosphate. The ethanolic extract of K. africana fruit also significantly lowered the increased depositionof stone-forming constituents in the kidneys of calculogenic rats. This is an indication that the ethanolicextract of K. africana fruit possesses urolithiatic activity [93].3.4.6. Anticonvulsant ActivityKigelia africana aqueous and methanolic bark extracts were investigated for anticonvulsant activityin Wistar rats using pentylenetetrazol (PTZ) and maximal electroshock (MES)-induced convulsionsmethod. Both the extracts demonstrated potent anticonvulsant activity, which is due to the presence oflinoleic and cinnamic acid. Doses of 250 mg/kg and 500 mg/kg of methanolic and aqueous extractswere administered to the rats intraperitoneally. The extracts gave significant protection against thePTZ and MES-induced convulsions [94].3.4.7. Antidiarrheal ActivityIndigenous knowledge of the use of bark, leaves and fruits of K. africana as a remedy for diarrheaamong African communities has been documented by several researchers (Table 1). Owolabi andOmogbai [95] investigated the antidiarrheal properties of K. africana ethanolic bark extracts usingSwiss albino mice. Five treatments were given. Group 1 (negative control) was treated with normalsaline (10 mL/kg), and group 5 (positive control) received atropine sulphate (0.1 mg/kg). Groups 2,3 and 4 received the ethanolic bark extract (100, 200 and 500 mg/kg, respectively). Castor oil was orallyadministered to induce diarrhea in the mice (0.3 mL). In order to enhance small intestinal motility,the mice were fasted overnight. Results of this study showed that oral doses of 100, 200 and 500 mg/kgcaused a marked inhibition of the diarrhea response following the castor oil administration (p < 0.05).Kigelia africana ethanolic bark extracts significantly (p < 0.0001) inhibited the small intestinal motilityin mice, with the 500 mg/kg dose giving the highest effect in both castor oil-induced diarrhea andsmall intestinal motility. When compared with the positive control, atropine, the antidiarrheal effect ofK. africana ethanolic bark extracts at 500 mg/kg was 82% and 62.7%, respectively, on castor oil- induceddiarrhea and small intestinal motility. This experiment was well-designed. The negative and positivecontrols are suitable for this study. Whereas the LC50 was given, the authors would have preparedthe lowest dose where there were no visible side effects. This is to help establish a no-effect dose,which is relevant in the case of further chronic studies and to establish an effective range in the case ofefficacy studies. This is majorly because, if the first tested dose is effective and, following this, the LD50is established, how can we establish the starting effective dose or the range if we do not start fromPlants 2020, 9, 753 19 of 35the lowest? According to the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 408 (2018)guidelines, a descending sequence of dose levels should be selected with a view to demonstrating anydosage-related response and a no-observed adverse-effect level (NOAEL). Furthermore, the authorswere not specific on the sex of animals used in the study. Whereas, in the beginning, they stated thatthe animals were of either sex, they did not elaborate on the number of animals used per sex whichis a deficiency. OECD guidelines emphasize the use of both sexes (male and female) in experiments,unless in cases where the pharmacokinetics of the drug are specific to the physiology of the animals.The authors should have evaluated the effects of this treatment at the sex level and investigated whetherany variations exist due to the differences in body physiology.3.4.8. Treatment of Sexually Transmitted DiseasesTraditional healers in the Igbo tribe in South-Eastern Nigeria use an aqueous or dilute alcoholextract of K. africana rootbark as a treatment for sexually transmitted diseases. Root extracts equivalentto those used in traditional preparations were found to contain the iridoids specioside and minecosideas major constituents. The root extracts, as well as two of the isolated iridoids, were tested, and their 1/10and 1/100 dilutions were tested against four bacteria species, viz., Staphylococcus aureus, Bacillus subtilis,Escherichia coli and Pseudomonas aeruginosa and the yeast Candida albicans, both in the absence andpresence of the enzyme emulsin. Emulsin enzyme converts catalpol-type iridoids to their moreantimicrobially active non-sugar-containing aglycones. The growth of the organisms in culturebroth was assessed by measuring the turbidity of the solution [96]. The results showed that theaqueous extract had strong activity, even in the absence of emulsin, against all the bacteria tested but,especially, against the yeast C. albicans. Candida infections are common opportunistic infections ofthe genito-urinary tract, and the traditional use of this plant extract might alleviate this in sexuallytransmitted diseases. Akunyili et al. [96] stated that the root extracts tested were equivalent to thoseused in traditional preparations, but they did not mention what concentrations were used. It was notmentioned how root extracts were prepared traditionally—for example, the ratio of water to the rootpowder and related information. This raises the concern that the experiment cannot be reproduced,and the results may not be reliable.Kigelia africana root extracts were reported as an effective treatment for sexually transmitteddiseases, and this was concluded from a broth dilution susceptibility study against Candida albicans [97].This pharmacological study, however, does not provide evidence of the successful treatment ofC. albicans in humans. Broth dilution is a susceptibility test that can be very inaccurate, especially asindividual mistakes in the preparation of stock concentrations can occur, and automation is impossible.The controls in this study are not mentioned. Most researchers employ in vitro tests at the beginningof their studies, and it is a good start to give an indication of the activity of any biological material.Nonetheless, in vitro studies must always be followed by a series of in vivo studies in biologicalsystems to determine their clinical effectiveness. In vivo studies have higher importance, since theyindicate the pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic characteristics of the materials under investigation.Additionally, detailed knowledge of the chemical formulations, administrative pathways and dosageused is critical when investigating and reporting an in vivo study.3.4.9. Diuretic ActivitySharma et al. [98] investigated the diuretic activity of K. africana aqueous bark extract by determiningthe urine volume, electrolyte concentration and diuretic potency in male albino rats. Differentconcentrations of the extract, 250 and 500 mg/kg were orally administered to hydrated rats, and theirurine output was immediately measured after five hours of treatment. Furosemide (10 mg/kg) wasused as the reference drug, while normal saline (0.9%) solution was used as the control. The resultshowed that the bark extract exhibited a dose-dependent diuretic property. The onset of diureticaction was within one hour and lasted up to five hours, with 500 mg/kg displaying more activity than250 mg/kg. The extract also caused a marked increase in Na+, K+ and Cl− labels [99].Plants 2020, 9, 753 20 of 353.4.10. Antioxidant ActivityAccording to Ponnan et al. [100], antioxidant compounds are abundantly available in plantsand play an important role in scavenging free radicals, thus providing protection to humans againstoxidative DNA damage. An excess of reactive oxygen species (ROS) can result in noncontrolledoxidation (oxidative stress) and damage of cellular structures, such as DNA, protein and membranelipids. It is believed that the presence of ROS is essential in cells, as they can act as key signalingmolecules for the activation of the stress responses and defense pathways [101]. The antioxidantactivity of K. africana has been investigated by various researchers, and K. africana plant parts haveproven to have good antioxidant activity. Hussain and colleagues investigated the antioxidant activityof K. africana bark, fruit and leaf using a DPPH (1,1-diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazyl) free radical assay [102].Quercetin was used as a standard antioxidant, which showed 94% inhibition. The bark of K. africanapossesses good antioxidant activity (67.33%); the fruit extract showed moderate antioxidant activity(62.66%), and the leaves showed the poorest antioxidant activity (59.66%), respectively [16]. In anotherstudy, the free radical scavenging ability of K. africana against DPPH was evaluated [103]. Ascorbicacid was used as a control. The methanolic stem bark extract scavenged DPPH in a dose-dependentmanner with IC50 = 175 µg/mL. Kigelia africana significantly (p < 0.05) scavenged the DPPH stableradical at IC50 = 175 µg/mL by 16.75%, 27.57%, 38.28% and 53.2%, respectively, when compared toascorbic acid [33].According to Olubunmi et al. [18], the free radical scavenging activities of K. africana root extractthrough the spectrophotometric assay on the reduction of DPPH compared favorably with α-tocopherol(standard antioxidant) at high concentrations. Scavenging activity was observed for the root extract atall concentrations (100, 250, 500 and 1000 µg/mL) assayed, with 250 µg/mL having the lowest activity,while the highest antioxidant capacity was observed at 1000 µg/mL. Dhungana et al. [11] reported theantioxidant activity of the methanolic leaf and fruit extracts of K. pinnata. Kigelia pinnata extracts showeda significant reduction in free radical-related complications, lipid peroxidation, blood cholesterol andlow-density lipoproteins [104]. In this study, the ethyl acetate fraction of the plant root had highantioxidant activity against DPPH, which may be due to the presence of a high phenolic content [36].An ex-vivo assessment of the antioxidant property of K. africana extracts in rat liver homogenatewas carried out by Olaleye and Rocha [105]. Administration of different pro-oxidants: 10-µM iron(II) sulphate, (FeSO4), 5-µM sodium nitroprusside (SNP) and 2-mM 3-nitropropionic acid led toan increased formation of thiobarbituric acid-reactive substances (TBARS), which indicates lipidperoxidation in the liver. Administration of K. africana methanolic fruit extracts significantly (p < 0.05)reduced the production of TBARS in a concentration-dependent manner in all the pro-oxidant-inducedoxidative stress, suggesting that the use of the plant in the treatment of various diseases, especiallyliver diseases, could be due to its ability to act as an antioxidant [105].Several researchers have conducted in vitro antioxidant assays on K. africana and many othermedicinal plants. Whereas the in vitro DPPH assay is commonly used to evaluate the radical scavengingactivity of plant extracts [11,16,18,103], it is not a measure of pharmacological activity. Moreover,the DPPH radical is synthetic and not biologically relevant, implying it does not mimic any knownfree radical produced in biological systems. Therefore, to conclude on the antioxidant status in agiven sample through in vitro assays, ABTS (2,2’-azino-bis (3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulphonic acid),FRAP (Ferric-Reducing Ability of Plasma) and ORAC (Oxygen Absorbance Capacity) assays should beused in combination with DPPH. Of all the methods, ABTS is the most sensitive [106]. Furthermore,in the reviewed studies, ascorbic acid was the only control used. However, in order to increase thevalidity and reliability of in vitro antioxidant results, at least two positive controls—for example,Trolox, Vitamin E, Vitamin C and BHT (butylated hydroxytoluene)—must be used in antioxidantassays. In any scientific experiment, using controls increases the reliability of the results, since often acomparison is made between control measurements and the other measurements. In the reviewedstudies, whereas the authors mention the controls used in the antioxidant assays, they do not mentiontheir concentrations. This, in turn, reduces the reliability of the study results. Generally, antioxidantPlants 2020, 9, 753 21 of 35activity is a chemical activity and can be found in any plant, and without proper in vivo studies,including bioavailability studies, antioxidant assays cannot relate to any medicinal use. Moreover,in recent literature, doubt has been expressed about the pharmacological significance of antioxidants.In vivo studies are always required, including proper positive and negative controls [101,107].3.4.11. Anticancer ActivityAccording to Khan and Mlungwana [108], the anticancer potential of K. africana has been indicatedby cytotoxicity of the root and bark materials in the brine shrimp bioassay against Artemia salina.Houghton and colleagues reported significant inhibitory activity of stem bark extracts against fourmelanoma cell lines and a renal carcinoma cell line and slight activity by fruit extracts [109]. The rootbark had activity against KB cells [82]. Inhibitory effects of K. africana fruit extracts on inducedtumors and inflammation in mice have been reported [110]. Momekov et al. [111] investigated theanticancer activity of K. africana methanolic stem bark extract. The powdered (1 mm) stem bark wasrefluxed with methanol (1: 20) for 1 h at 80 ◦C. After cooling at room temperature, the extract wasfiltered, and the residue was subject to the same extraction process twice. Thereafter, the filtrates weregathered, and the solvent was evaporated in vacuo to dryness. The methanolic extract of K. africanastem bark had significant cytotoxicity against human tumor cell lines, with IC50 values of 15.1 ± 3.4,126.0 ± 9.1, 90.7 ± 4.7, 186.0 ± 9.2, 101.0 ± 7.4, 124.1 ± 8.9, 11.8 ± 3.8 and 10.2± 2.7 µg/mL against T-cellleukemia (a KE-37 derivative), acute lymphoid leukemia, acute myeloid leukemia, chronic myeloidleukemia, non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, Hodgkin’s lymphoma, breast cancer and murine lung cancercell line, respectively. These results compared with the vincristine-positive control (IC50 = 0.22 ± 0.1,3.3 ± 0.9, 1.5 ± 0.7, 4.1 ± 1.4, 1.2 ± 0.6, 7.4 ± 1.0, 3.7 ± 0.6 and 2.2 ± 0.4 µg/mL) against T-cell leukemia(a KE-37 derivative), acute lymphoid leukemia, acute myeloid leukemia, chronic myeloid leukemia,non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, Hodgkin’s lymphoma, breast cancer and murine lung cancer cell line,respectively [111]. Momekov et al. [111] carried out an extremely useful study, although cytotoxicity ofthe extracts on normal cells was not reported. This leaves the reader wondering whether the safetyof the extracts on normal cells was first established before testing the extracts on cancer cell lines.Testing plant extracts on normal cells is of paramount importance before tests on cancer cell lines areconducted. This is majorly because, whether an extract is toxic on cancer lines but not safe on normalcell lines, it is not a good product lead. Therefore, nonselectivity is an issue that was not addressed bythe authors.In another study, the antitumor activity of K. africana methanolic leaf extracts of 100 and 200 mg/kgwere evaluated against the Ehrlich ascites carcinoma (EAC) tumor induced into mammary glands ofmice. Acute and short-term toxicity studies were performed at the beginning to ascertain the safety ofmethanolic extracts. After 12 days of tumor inoculation, the extract was administered daily for 30 days.The effect of the methanolic extracts of K. africana on the growth of the tumor, life span of EAC-bearinghosts and simultaneous alterations in the hematological and histopathological profile were estimated.The methanolic extracts of K. africana resulted in a decrease in the tumor size and improved averagebody weight and mean survival time, thereby increasing the life span of EAC tumor-bearing mice [63].Higgins and colleagues investigated the cytotoxic activity for K. africana fruit extracts againstmelanoma and two breast cancer cell lines [112]. They used a bioactivity-driven separation approach toidentify demethylkigelin, kigelin, ferulic acid and 2-(1-hydroxyethyl)-naphtho[2,3-b] furan-4,9-dioneas the compounds thought to be responsible for the cytotoxicity. Of these, 2-(1-hydroxyethyl)-naphtho[2,3-b] furan-4,9-dione was a particularly potent cytotoxic agent.Potent antiproliferative activity against the Caco-2 and HeLa carcinoma cell lines was noted forK. africana methanolic fruit extracts [45]. Of further interest, the chloroform and hexane K. africanafruit extracts also demonstrated a stimulatory effect on cell proliferation. The root bark extracts ofKigelia have been recommended to treat uterine cancer [113]. Chivandi and colleagues investigated theeffect of K. africana seed oil on cell proliferation in the culture using human colon adenocarcinoma(Caco-2) and human embryonic kidney (HEK-293) cells [114]. They maintained and treated the cellsPlants 2020, 9, 753 22 of 35with various concentrations (0, 20, 40, 80, 100 and 120 mg/L) of K. africana seed oil. The trypan bluedye exclusion method was used to determine cell growth 48 hours after oil treatment. The studyresults showed that the K. africana seed oil suppressed both Caco-2 and HEK-293 cell growth in adose-dependent manner. The oil did not increase cell death, as the number of dead cells remainedunchanged under control and oil-treated conditions. The oil significantly suppressed Caco-2 cellgrowth at all concentrations compared to HEK-293 cell growth. Whereas the Caco-2 cell line is acontinuous line of heterogeneous human epithelial colorectal adenocarcinoma cells, HEK293 cells areimmortalized by Ad 5 E1A and E1B. HEK293T cells also express SV40 large T antigen. Thus, the cellslack normal pRb and p53 functions. The suppression of Caco-2 and HEK-293 cell proliferation byK. africana seed oil suggests a potential antiproliferative effect of the oil on the two cell lines [114].The methanolic extract of K. africana root contains the constituent lapachol [115], which is reportedto be effective in the treatment of solar keratosis, skin cancer and Kaposi sarcoma, an HIV-relatedskin ailment [47].Kigelia africana has also found application in traditional cancer therapy, and some studies supportits cytotoxic effects on melanoma, Ehrlich ascites carcinoma and breast cancer cells. Unfortunately,there a few reports regarding the IC50 of K. africana on normal cells, which leaves one contemplatingwhether this species is selectively toxic to cancer cells when taken as a remedy. Furthermore, there isa need to do more in vivo studies regarding the biological activity of K. africana, as this wouldprovide a clear picture of the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of the targeted compounds inbiological systems.Several researchers have concluded that, if a plant has a cytotoxic effect, it has anticancer properties,which may not be correct. It is only after positive clinical trials for cancer treatment that any substanceor compound can be confirmed anticancer. Another dilemma is most often that the terms cytotoxic,anticancer and chemopreventive are used interchangeably, despite each having a completely differentmeaning. Whereas an anticancer agent is any substance that is effective in the treatment of malignant,or cancerous, diseases, a chemopreventive agent is any natural, synthetic or biologic chemical agentthat reverses, suppresses or prevents carcinogenic progression to invasive cancer [116]. Cytotoxicagents are substances that contain chemicals that are toxic to cells, preventing their replication orgrowth. Additionally, most often, researchers use the term cytotoxicity to mean anticancer, which ismisleading. A cytotoxic agent is not limited to use in cancer treatments but can also be used totreat several other disorders, such as rheumatoid arthritis and multiple sclerosis. In a nutshell,the activity of herbal preparations is not a function of a single compound but, rather, a mixture ofcompounds that act in synergy to cause an effect. Until the active compound responsible in a givenherbal preparation is identified, isolated and tested, plant extracts simply remain effective subject topurification and standardization.3.4.12. Toxicological EvidenceSharma and colleagues went further to investigate the toxicity of the aqueous bark extract usingexperimental rats and found that it was safe up to 5 g/kg [98]. The acute toxicity of the Kigeliamethanolic fruit extract was investigated using male Sprague–Dawley rats. In this study, the extractwas well-tolerated by the animals, as there were no observable signs of acute toxicity like restiveness,seizure or dizziness after the administration of 400 mg/kg. However, at 6400 mg/kg, the animalsshowed signs of toxicity like jerks and writhes with 60% death. At 12,800 mg/kg, there was 80% deathof the animals. The LD50 was estimated from a log dose curve to be 3981.07 mg/kg [38,51]. In anotherstudy, 100 mg/kg aqueous extract was administered to rats induced with acetaminophen liver toxicity.The extract countered the effect of acetaminophen on the activities of aspartate transaminase (AST),alanine transaminase (ALT), superoxide dismutase (SOD), catalase (CAT), gluthathione peroxidase(GPx) and δ- amino levulinate dehydrogenase (δ-ALAD) [105].Nyarko and colleagues conducted a comparative study of subchronic and chronic toxicity ofK. africana using various combinations [117]. An aqueous antidiabetic polyherbal extract ADD-199Plants 2020, 9, 753 23 of 35containing K. africana and three other plants at a daily dose of 100 or 500 mg/kg body weight wereadministered to male Wistar albino rats over 30 days. After the 30-day study, there was no effect on thehematological, urinary and plasma biochemical parameters. The extract also had no effect on somemodulators of hepatic cytochrome P450 (CYP) isozymes normally measured as indices of organ-specifictoxicity or the potential for drug interactions. Specifically, ADD-199 containing K. africana did not affectthe plasma AST, ALT, alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and albumin or creatinine kinase (CK) levels. It alsodid not affect plasma creatinine and urea levels. Furthermore, ADD-199 neither affected the packedcell volume (PCV) nor the levels of red blood cells (RBC), reticulocytes, platelets, lymphocytes andgranulocyte. It, however, caused significant dose-dependent reductions in white blood cell counts atday 15, with varying degrees of recovery by day 30. ADD-199 also reduced the rate of body weightincreases in week 3. However, no changes were observed in organ weight at termination. The ADD-199did not significantly affect zoxazolamine-induced paralysis and pentobarbital-induced sleeping times,as well as certain CYP isozyme activities in rats, suggesting that ADD-199 had no overt organ-specifictoxicity and did not demonstrate a potential for drug interactions via CYP-mediated metabolism inrats following subchronic administration.The protective effect of the methanol extract of the K. africana fruit extract against cisplatin-inducedrenal toxicity in male rats was investigated by Azu et al. [38]. The rats treated with cisplatin for 28 dayssuffered a loss in body weight, elevation in blood urea nitrogen and serum creatinine levels, as well astubular necrosis. Pretreatment with the K. africana fruit methanol extract at 100 mg/kg as a prophylaxissignificantly prevented these changes. Though the posttreatment of animals with the extract after acisplatin treatment did not completely restore the serum catalase activity, it caused some alleviatingeffects, suggesting that the K. africana fruit extract may protect against cisplatin-induced renal toxicityand, hence, might serve as a novel agent to limit renal injury.Studies on the pharmacological activity of K. africana in Section 3.4 are summarized in Table 3 below.As per the reviewed studies, the authors investigated the biological activity of K. africana as asingle species, whereas most traditional medicine preparations usually involve the use of K. africana incombination with other plant species (Table 1). This is due to the effectiveness of polyherbal medicinepreparations compared to single plant preparations. Therefore, the polyherbal concept should beadopted by researchers when carrying out laboratory experiments to get an understanding of the effectsof molecules from different plants (synergy) and their mechanisms of action, as compared to the use ofa single species. On the other hand, if a single species is investigated, as it is often done, researchersshould understand that the efficacy of any herbal remedy is not a function of a single compound.It involves the synergy and antagonism of several compounds to induce activity. This is one of themany reasons isolated plant compounds should be investigated for synergism and antagonism tounderstand how different compounds interact to cause effects.Plants 2020, 9, 753 24 of 35Table 3. Pharmacological activity of Kigelia africana extracts.Activity Plant Part Extract Organism Observed Effect Compounds Responsible ReferenceIn vitro antibacterial activity Leaf Ethanol E. coli Maximum activity (22 mm)Specioside, verminoside [16,42,45]P. vulgaris Moderate activityK. pneumoniae ResistantC. amalonaticus ResistantAqueous C. amalonaticus Maximum activity (7 mm)S. aureus Moderate activity (5 mm)P. aeruginosa Moderate activity (4 mm)P. vulgaris Moderate activity (4 mm)K. pneumoniae ResistantC. amalonaticus Moderate activityS. aureus Moderate activityP. aeruginosa Moderate activityP. vulgaris Moderate activityK. pneumoniae Least activityn-hexane P. vulgaris Maximum activity (6 mm)S. aureus Minimum activity (2 mm)K. pneumoniae ResistantP. aeruginosa ResistantC. amalonaticus ResistantE. coli ResistantPlants 2020, 9, 753 25 of 35Table 3. Cont.Activity Plant Part Extract Organism Observed Effect Compounds Responsible ReferenceFruit Aqueous P. vulgaris Maximum activity (6 mm)Specioside, verminoside [16,42,45]C. amalonaticus Maximum activity (6 mm)S. aureus Moderate activityE. coli Moderate activityK. pneumoniae ResistantP. aeruginosa ResistantP. vulgaris Maximum activity (23 mm)C. amalonaticus Minimum activityBark Ethanol E. coli Maximum activity (10 mm)P. aeruginosa Moderate activityP. vulgaris Moderate activityS. aureus Least activity (1 mm)K. pneumoniae ResistantC. amalonaticus ResistantBark n-hexane C. amalonaticus Maximum activity (4 mm)E. coli Minimum activity (2 mm)S. aureus ResistantP. aeruginosa ResistantP. vulgaris ResistantK. pneumoniae ResistantPlants 2020, 9, 753 26 of 35Table 3. Cont.Activity Plant Part Extract Organism Observed Effect Compounds Responsible ReferenceBark Aqueous S. aureus Maximum activity (15 mm)Specioside, verminoside [16,42,45]P. aeruginosa Moderate activity (5 mm)P. vulgaris Moderate activity (5 mm)C. amalonaticus Minimum activityK. pneumoniae ResistantE. coli ResistantE. coli Very good activity (20 mm)C. amalonaticus Least activity (3 mm)Antifungal activity Fruit Methanol P. chrysogenum Resistant[45]A. niger, C. albicans and P. chrysogenum Strong inhibition(1238, 841.2 and 989.7 µg/mL, respectively)C. neoformans ResistantAqueous A. niger, C. albicans and P. chrysogenum Strong inhibition(2487, 2060 and 2768 µg/mL, respectively)P. chrysogenum ResistantEthyl acetate A. niger, C. albicans and P. chrysogenum Moderate inhibition(1463, 1278 and 1744 µg/mL, respectively)P. chrysogenum ResistantPlants 2020, 9, 753 27 of 35Table 3. Cont.Activity Plant Part Extract Organism Observed Effect Compounds Responsible ReferenceAnti-inflammatory andAnalgesic Activity Leaf Methanol MiceFirst hour at the dose of 150 mg/kg and 15 mg/kg bodyweight for reference drug diclofenac reduced hind pawdiameter by 0.21% and 1.10%, respectivelyVerminoside [45,60,74–77]Second hour at the dose of 100 mg/kg and 150 mg/kgbody weight for reference drug diclofenac reducedhind paw diameter by 0.42% and 1.42%, respectivelyThird hour, the extract at the dose levels of 50 mg/kg,100 mg/kg and 150 mg/kg body weight, as well asdiclofenac, reduced the inflamed hind paw diameter by0.86%, 2.25%, 3.41% and 4.02%, respectivelyFourth hour at the doses of 50, 100 and 150 mg/kg bodyweight reduced inflamed hind paw diameter by 1.95%,2.98% and 4.98% and reference drug reduced inflamedpaw diameter by 4.43%Leaf Methanol Wistar rats Higher dose (400 mg/kg) exhibited better analgesicactivity than the lower dose (200 mg/kg)Antidiabetic Activity Leaf Aqueous andethyl acetate Swiss albino mice Extracts showed a blood glucose-lowering effect [42,79]Antiprotozoal Activity Root bark Hexane, dichloromethaneand ethyl acetateP. falciparum, T. brucei andT. brucei rhodesiense Significant anti-plasmodial activitySpecioside, 2β, 3β,19α-trihydroxyurs-12-en-28-oic acid,atranorin, p-hydroxycinnamic acid,Lapachol, verminoside and minecoside[48,61]Stem bark Butanol E. histolytica Significant antiplasmodial activity2-(1-hydroxyethyl)-naphtho-[2,3-b]-furan-4,9-quinone,isopinnatal, kigelinol and isokigelinol[58]Antiurolithiatic Activity Fruit Ethanol Male wistar albino rats Reduced the elevated urinary oxalate, uric acidand phosphate [94]Anticonvulsant Activity Bark Aqueous and Methanol Wistar rats Potent anticonvulsant activity Linoleic and cinnamic acid [95]Antidiarrheal Activity Bark Ethanol MiceSignificantly inhibited the castor oil-induced diarrheain mice, with 500 mg/kg for extract and atropine(positive control) 62.7% and 82% P, respectively.[96]Treatment of SexuallyTransmitted Diseases Roots Aqueous C. albicans strong activity, even in the absence of emulsin Iridoids [96,97]Antidiuretic Activity Bark Aqueous Male wistar albino rats Strong diuretic activity [98,99]Plants 2020, 9, 753 28 of 35Table 3. Cont.Activity Plant Part Extract Organism Observed Effect Compounds Responsible ReferenceAntioxidant Activity Bark, Fruitand Leaf MethanolQuercetin (positive control)—94% inhibition,bark—(67.33%) inhibition, fruit—(62.66%) inhibition andleaves—(59.66%) inhibition Phenols[16,102]Root Ethyl acetate High antioxidant activity [33,103]Fruit Methanol Significantly reduced the production of thiobarbituric acidreactive substances (TBARS)[104]Anticancer Activity Stem bark MethanolCytotoxic against human tumor cell lines with IC50 valuesof 15.1 ± 3.4, 126.0 ± 9.1, 90.7 ± 4.7, 186.0 ± 9.2, 101.0 ± 7.4,124.1 ± 8.9, 11.8 ± 3.8 and 10.2± 2.7 µg/mL against T-cellleukemia, acute lymphoid leukemia, acute myeloidleukemia, chronic myeloid leukemia, non-Hodgkin’slymphoma, Hodgkin’s lymphoma, breast cancer andmurine lung cancer cell line, respectivelyDimethylkigelin, kigelin, ferulic acidand 2-(1-hydroxyethyl)-naphtho[2,3-b]furan-4,9-dione[108,109]Leaf Methanol Mice Decrease in tumor size [111]Fruit Potent against melanoma and breast cancer cell lines [112]Toxicity Fruit Methanol Male Sprague–Dawley rats LD50 Extract was safe (LD50 was 3981.07 mg/kg)3981.07 mg/kg [38,51]Polyherbal Aqueous Male Wistar albino rats After the 30 days, there was no effect on hematological,urinary and plasma biochemical parameters [117]Plants 2020, 9, 753 29 of 354. ConclusionsDespite efforts by several researchers to document the traditional uses of K. africana (Table 1),a lot of information has been lost, owing to the death of custodians commonly known as livinglibraries. In addition, many traditional uses have not been scientifically validated; thus, they aresimply claims. Thus, the gap to completely profile the ethnobotanical knowledge and phytochemistryand pharmacological activity of K. africana is still wide, and more research needs to be conducted todiscover the unknowns and confirm the knowns. This will increase the significance of this species at theinternational level, as compared to the community level. Kigelia africana contains many phytochemicalsthat have already been identified (Table 2), isolated and their pharmacological activity validated.Nonetheless, the mechanism of action for pure compounds has not been studied for the majority. As perthe reviewed studies, most pharmacological studies that have been carried out on K. africana plantparts have been based on traditional uses [12]. Fruits have received more attention from researchersregarding their bioactivity compared to other plant parts. This has left little scientific basis for thebioactivity of the leaves, flowers, stems and roots [18]. Therefore, other plant parts need to be givensimilar attention, since they may have unique and highly potent phytochemicals.Despite the norms surrounding herbal medicine preparations as being safe with fewer sideeffects [118], this is completely wrong, except when proven in the laboratory. Many herbal medicinepreparations have caused life-threatening side effects and death in the worse scenarios [119]. Althoughmany such cases have not been documented, some cases of poisoning have been reported in theliterature [120–122]. Therefore, quality, efficacy and safety are key elements to consider before usingany herbal product or making it commercially available [123]. Unfortunately, several products havebeen formulated from K. africana and are available on the market, yet they do not meet internationalquality standards. This implies that most of these product formulations have no standard dose andare of uncertain quality, efficacy and safety. Thus, if the availability and acceptance of K. africanaproducts on international markets is to be increased, programs to promote training on efficacy, safety,international quality standards, sustainable use and conservation of the natural resource base need tobe established.For a brighter future of medicinal plant research, researchers should embrace a high-throughputanalysis before coming to conclusions concerning the biological activity of medicinal plants. This isbecause a high-throughput analysis combines genomics, proteomics and chemical and ultrastructuraldata. Additionally, all in vitro studies need to be followed by clinical trials to demonstrate the safetyand efficacy of traditional treatments in biological systems, and all experiments must comply withinternational scientific standards and guidelines. There is also a need to add more informationto the basic pharmacological assays and aim for clinical trials by focusing on molecular drug anddisease targets [124].Traditional medicine (TM) is strongly embedded in indigenous systems that are rooted withinlocal communities and are very strong. Despite the strong roots of TM, there is a huge stumbling blockto its development, and this is ignoring the capacity and roles of TM practitioners in national andinternational policies. Additionally, physicians and other health professionals are also not exposed toTM in their training, leading to a wide gap between conventional and TM practice and a disconnectbetween professional health groups and patients who choose to continue TM use. Another stumblingblock to TM development is the failure of researchers to guard the intellectual property of localcommunities where they collect indigenous knowledge (IK) for their research. These two stumblingblocks are of regional, national and international importance. Interestingly, intellectual propertyrights frameworks such as the access to genetic resources and benefit sharing exist, but they are notfully operational, presenting a bottleneck for equitable benefit sharing, which is a prerequisite infostering partnerships [125]. Therefore, researchers should take on the mantle and jealously guard theintellectual property (IP) of indigenous communities through inclusive patenting procedures. Similarly,the principle of prior informed consent as enshrined in the Convention for Biological Diversity needsto be enforced while collecting ethnomedical information.Plants 2020, 9, 753 30 of 355. LimitationsThis review provides an overview of the published developments on Kigelia af ricana, with theaim to discuss its current context in Africa. As such, this paper does not present a systematic review,nor does it present a meta-analysis of all primary and secondary literature published on the topicareas of interest. When synthesizing findings from technical reports and standard testing guidelinespublished by leading international organizations such as WHO, EUCAST and OECD, respectively,the review relied on the original authors’ quality assessments of studies and instructions includedwithin their reports.Author Contributions: Conceptualization, A.N.; data curation, A.N. and L.J.M.; writing—original draftpreparation, A.N.; writing—review and editing, L.J.M., S.M.N., N.L. and J.D.K. and supervision, L.J.M. and N.L.All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.Funding: This work was funded by the Carnegie Co-operation of New York through Future Africa, University ofPretoria, South Africa.Conflicts of Interest: The authors report no conflicts of interest in this work.References1. Tabuti, J.R.S.; Kukunda, C.B.; Kaweesi, D.; Kasilo, O.M. Herbal medicine use in the districts of Nakapiripirit,Pallisa, Kanungu, and Mukono in Uganda. J. Ethnobiol. Ethnomed. 2012, 8, 35. [CrossRef] [PubMed]2. Chen, S.L.; Yu, H.; Luo, H.M.; Wu, Q.; Li, C.F.; Steinmetz, A. Conservation and sustainable use of medicinalplants: Problems, progress, and prospects. Chin. Med. 2016, 11, 37. [CrossRef] [PubMed]3. Grace, O.M.; Light, M.L.; Lindsey, K.L.; Mulholland, D.A.; van Staden, J.; Jager, A.K.; Eloff, J.N. Antibacterialactivity and isolation of active compounds from fruit of the traditional African medicinal tree Kigelia africana.S. Afr. J. Bot. 2002, 68, 220–222. [CrossRef]4. Priya, B.; Menkudale, A.; Gahlot, M.; Joshi, P.; Agarwal, M. Pharmacognostical study, phytochemical analysisand phenolic content of Kigelia africana leaves. Int. J. Pharm. Pharm. Sci. 2013, 5, 163–166.5. Chih-Cheng, L.; Lu-Te, C.; Yuan-Chen, W.; Yan-Hong, T.; Jia-Shang, L.; Boakye, A.; Glew, R.H.; Glew, R.S.Polyphenol and Antioxidant Content of Kigelia africana Leaves from Ghana. Food 2012, 6, 1–5.6. Singh, A.; Kumari, S.; Singh, A.K.; Singh, N.K. Ethnopharmacology and pharmacology of Kigelia africana(Lam.) Benth. Int. J. Green Pharm. 2018, 11, S23–S31.7. Halder, S. A Review on Kigelia africana. World J. Pharm. Res. 2017, 6, 389–411. [CrossRef]8. Komakech, R.; Omujal, F. Kigelia africana. A Medicinal Plant with a Cosmetic Potential. South World Newsand Views from Emerging Countries. 2017. Available online: https://www.southworld.net/kigelia-africana-a-medicinal-plant-with-a-cosmetic-potential/ (accessed on 12 February 2020).9. Van Wyk, B.E. A review of ethnobotanical research in southern Africa. S. Afr. J. Bot. 2002, 68, 1–13. [CrossRef]10. Nsubuga, U. The Fruit that Cures Syphilis. New Vision. Uganda’s Leading Daily. 2018. Available online:https://www.newvision.co.ug/new_vision/news/1475477/fruit-cures-syphilis (accessed on 5 January 2020).11. Dhungana, B.R.; Jyothi, Y.; Das, K. Kigelia pinnata: Exploration of Potential Medicinal Usage in HumanAilments. J. Pharm. Res. 2017, 15, 138. [CrossRef]12. Adam, I.Y.; Alhameed, I.A. Kigelia africana Fruits’ Extracts anti Hepato-Toxic Effects on Male Wistar RatsLiver Destruction Induced by CCL4. Asian J. Med. Sci. 2013, 5, 26–32. ISSN: 2040-8765, e-ISSN: 2040-8773.13. Cragg, G.M.; Newman, D.J. Medicinals for the millennia. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 2001, 953, 3–25. [CrossRef][PubMed]14. Sidjui, S.L.; Zeuko’o Menkem, E.; Marie, R.; Toghueo, K.; Olivier Noté, O.; Mahiou-Leddet, V.; Herbette, G.;Boyom, F.F.; Ollivier, E.; Folefoc, G.N. SHORT REPORT Secondary Metabolites from Jacaranda mimosifoliaand Kigelia africana (Bignoniaceae) and their Anticandidal Activity. Rec. Nat. Prod. 2014, 83, 307–311.15. Burkill, H.M. The Useful Plants of West Tropical Africa; Royal Botanic Gardens: Kew, UK, 1985; pp. 254–257.16. Hussain, T.; Fatima, K.F.; Rafay, M.; Shabir, S.; Akram, M.; Bano, S. Evaluation of antibacterial and antioxidantactivity of leaves, fruit and bark of Kigelia africana. Pak. J. Bot. 2016, 48, 277–283.17. Fitriyani, D.P.S.G.S. Phytochemicals and cytotoxicity of sausage fruit (Kigelia africana) extract against breastcancer cells MCF-7 in vitro. J. Pharm. Res. 2018, 12, 288–292. Available online: http://jprsolutions.info/article_detail.php?article_id=2011 (accessed on 14 January 2020).Plants 2020, 9, 753 31 of 3518. Olubunmi, A.; Olatunji, A.G.; Adeyemi, O.S.; Scott, F.O. Antioxidant and antimicrobial activity of cuticularwax from Kigelia africana. FABAD J. Pharm. Sci. 2009, 34, 187–194.19. Kakembo, T. Sausage Tree Demystified. A Convert to Herbal Medicines Muses about the Sausage Tree Fruitin Kidepo Valley National Park. 2017. Available online: https://www.newvision.co.ug/new_vision/news/1451939/sausage-tree-demystified. (accessed on 9 March 2020).20. Oyelami, O.A.; Yusuf, K.O.; Oyelami, A.O. The Use of Kigelia africana in the Management of polycystic OvarySyndrome (PCOS). Chin. Med. J. (Engl.) 2012, 3, 1–3. [CrossRef]21. Eldeen, I.M.S.; Van Staden, J. In vitro pharmacological investigation of extracts from some trees used inSudanese traditional medicine. S. Afr. J. Bot. 2007, 73, 435–440. [CrossRef]22. Saini, S.; Kaur, H.; Verma, B.; Ripudaman, S.S.K. Kigelia africana (Lam.) Benth—An overview. Indian J. Nat.Prod. Resour. 2008, 2, 190–197.23. Van Wyk, B.E.; de Wet, H.; Van Heerden, F.R. An ethnobotanical survey of medicinal plants in the southeasternKaroo, South Africa. S. Afr. J. Bot. 2008, 74, 696–704. [CrossRef]24. Takeda, N. Picornaviruses (ピコルナウイルス’). Uirusu (ウイルス) 2002, 51, 1–5. [CrossRef]25. Wickens, G.E.; Oliver-Bever, B. Medicinal Plants in Tropical West Africa. Kew Bull. 2007. [CrossRef]26. De Wet, H.; Ngubane, S.C. Traditional herbal remedies used by women in a rural community in northernMaputaland (South Africa) for the treatment of gynaecology and obstetric complaints. S. Afr. J. Bot. 2014,94, 129–139. [CrossRef]27. Olufemi, A.E.; Omotayo, O.I.; Akinbo, B.D.; Monjeed, I.; Adebola, O.; Bilikis, S.; Temitope, A. Kigelia africanaStem Bark, Fruit and Leaf Extracts Alleviate Benzene-induced Leukaemia in Rats. J. Pharm. Res. Int. 2017,18, 1–10. [CrossRef]28. Agyare, C.; Serwaa Dwobeng, A.; Agyepong, N.; Boakye, Y.D.; Mensah, K.B.; Ayande, P.G.;Adarkwa-Yiadom, M. Antimicrobial, Antioxidant, and Wound Healing Properties of Kigelia africana. Adv.Pharmacol. Sci. 2013, 2013, 692613. [CrossRef] [PubMed]29. Oyebanji, B.; Olatoye, O.; Oyewole, O. Effects of methanolic leaf, bark and fruit extracts of Kigelia africana onhaematology and erythrocyte membrane stability in rats. Sokoto J. Vet. Sci. 2015, 13, 1–5. [CrossRef]30. Grace, O.M.; Prendergast, H.D.V.; Jäger, A.K.; van Staden, J.; van Wyk, A.E. Bark medicines used in traditionalhealthcare in KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa: An inventory. S. Afr. J. Bot. 2003, 69, 301–363. [CrossRef]31. Palmer, E.; Norah Pitman, N. Trees of Southern Africa, Covering All Known Indigenous Species in the Republic ofSouth Africa, South-West Africa, Botswana, Lesotho & Swaziland; A.A. Balkema: Cape Town, South Africa, 1972.32. Abdalla, A.N. Antimicrobial and Wound Healing Activity of Some Sudanese Medicinal Plants. Master’sThesis, Department of Pharmaceutics, University of Khartoum, Khartoum, Sudan, 2004; p. 199.33. Akintunde, J.K.; Akintunde, D.G.; Irondi, E.A.; Babaita, K. Antioxidants from stem bark of Kigelia africanainhibits free radicals and membrane lipid damage in rat testes in vitro. Oxid Antioxid. Med. Sci. 2016, 5, 63–69.[CrossRef]34. Hutchinson, J.; Daziel, J.M. Flora of West Tropical Africa, 2nd ed.; Hepper, N., Ed.; Crown Agents for OverseasGovernments & Administrations: London, UK, 1993; Volume 11, p. 385.35. Houghton, P.J.; Jâger, A.K. The sausage tree (Kigelia pinnata): Ethnobotany and recent scientific work. S. Afr.J. Bot. 2016, 68, 14–20. [CrossRef]36. Olubunmi, A.; Adeyemi, S.O.; Akpan, E.; Adeosun, C.B.; Olatunji, G.A. Chemical composition and antioxidantpotentials of Kigelia pinnata root oil and extracts. Excli J. 2011, 10, 264–273.37. Akah, P.A. Antidiarrheal Activity of Kigelia africana in Experimental Animals. J. Herbs Spices Med. Plants1996, 4, 31–38. [CrossRef]38. Azu, O.O.; Duru, F.; Abraham, A.; Osinubi, A.A.; Oremosu, A.; Noronha, C.C.; Elesha, S.O.Histomorphometric effects of Kigelia africana (Bignoniaceae) fruit extract on the testis following short-termtreatment with cisplatin in male Sprague-Dawley rats. Fertil. Soc. J. 2010, 15, 200–208. [CrossRef]39. Otimenyin, S.O.; Uzochukwu, D.C. Spasmolytic and anti-diarrhea effects of the bark of Erythrina senegalensisand root of Kigelia africana. Asian J. Pharm. Clin. Res. 2010, 3, 11–14.40. Iwu, M.M.; Obidoa, O.; Anazodo, M. Biochemical mechanism of the antimalarial activity of Azadirachta indicaleaf extract. Pharmacol. Res. Commun. 1986, 18, 81–91. [CrossRef]41. Lamorde, M.; Tabuti, J.R.; Obua, C.; Kukunda-Byobona, C.; Lanyero, H.; Byakika-Kibwika, P.; Bbosa, G.S.;Lubega, A.; Ogwal-Okeng, J.; Ryan, M.; et al. Medicinal plants used by traditional medicine practitioners forthe treatment of HIV/AIDS and related conditions in Uganda. J. Ethnopharmacol. 2010, 130, 43–53. [CrossRef]Plants 2020, 9, 753 32 of 3542. Njogu, S.M.; Arika, W.M.; Machocho, A.K.; Ngeranwa, J.J.N.; Njagi, E.N.M. In vivo Hypoglycemic Effectof Kigelia africana (Lam): Studies with Alloxan-Induced Diabetic Mice. J. Evid. Based Integr. Med. 2018,23, 2515690X18768727. [CrossRef] [PubMed]43. Anvesh; Hemamalini; Vimal, K.V.; Shailaja; Rajyalaxmi. Antiulcer effect of the methanolic extract ofKigelia africana Lam. Benth (Bignoniaceae). Pharmacologyonline 2010, 351, 344–351.44. Food and Agricultural Organisation (FAO). Some Medicinal Forest Plants of Africa and Latin America; FAO forestrypapers; FAO: Rome, Italy, 1986; Volume 67, p. 274.45. Arkhipov, A.; Shalom, J.; Matthews, B.; Ian Edwin Cock, I.E. Metabolomic profiling of Kigelia africana extractswith anti-cancer activity by high resolution tandem mass spectroscopy. Pharmacogn. Commun. 2014, 4, 10–32.[CrossRef]46. Sidjui, L.S.; Melong, R.; Mahiou-Leddet, V.; Herbette, G.; Tchinda, A.T.; Ollivier, E.; Folefoc, G.N. Triterpenesand lignans from Kigelia africana. J. Appl. Pharm. Sci. 2015, 5, 1–6. [CrossRef]47. Jackson, S.J.; Houghton, P.J.; Retsas, S.; Photiou, A. Cytotoxicity of Norviburtinal and Isopinnatal fromKigelia pinnata against cancer cell lines. Planta Med. 2000, 66, 758–761. [CrossRef]48. Binutu, O.A.; Adesogan, K.E.; Okogun, J.I. Antibacterial and antifungal compounds from Kigelia pinnata.Planta Med. 1996, 62, 352–353. [CrossRef]49. Akunyili, D.N.; Houghton, P.J. Meroterpenoids and naphthaquinones from Kigelia pinnata. Phytochemistry1993, 32, 1015–1018. [CrossRef]50. Saraswathy, A.; Purushothaman, K.K.; Patra, A.; Dey, A.K.; Kundu, A.B. Shoreaphenol, a polyphenol fromShorea robusta. Phytochemistry 1992, 31, 2561–2562. [CrossRef]51. Zofou, D.K.A.B.O.; Kengne, M.; Tene, M.; Ngemenya, M.N.; Tane, P.; Titanji, V.P.K. In vitro anti-plasmodialactivity and cytotoxicity of crude extracts and compounds from the stem bark of Kigelia africana (Lam.) Benth(Bignoniaceae). Parasitol. Res. 2011, 108, 1383–1390. [CrossRef]52. Dorcas, O.; Moronkola, D.O.; Olaoluwa, O.O.; Oladosu, I.A.; Aboaba, S.A.; Aiyelaagbe, O.O. Phytochemicaland Antimicrobial Activities of Extracts from Six Medicinal Plants Utilized as Antimalarials in Ethno-Medicine.Pharm. Chem. J. 2018, 5, 52–61.53. Govindachari, T.R.; Patankar, S.J.; Viswanathan, N. Isolation and structure of two new dihydroisocoumarinsfrom Kigelia pinnata. Phytochemistry 1971, 10, 1603–1606. [CrossRef]54. Harborne, J.B. Dictionary of natural products. Phytochemistry 2003. [CrossRef]55. Idris, A.; Al-tahir, I.; Idris, E. Antibacterial activity of endophytic fungi extracts from the medicinal plantKigelia africana. Egypt. Acad. J. Biol. Sci. 2018, 5, 1–9. [CrossRef]56. Atolani, O.; Olatunji, G.A.; Fabiyi, O.A.; Adeniji, A.J.; Ogbole, O.O. Phytochemicals from Kigelia pinnataleaves show antioxidant and anticancer potential on human cancer cell line. J. Med. Food. 2013, 16, 878–885.[CrossRef] [PubMed]57. Olatunji, A.G.; Olubunmi, A. Comprehensive scientific demystification of Kigelia africana: A review. Afr. J.Pure Appl. Chem. 2009, 3, 158–164.58. Moideen, S.V.K.; Houghton, P.J.; Rock, P.; Croft, S.L.; Aboagye-Nyame, F. Activity of extracts andnaphthoquinones from Kigelia pinnata against Trypanosoma brucei brucei and Trypanosoma brucei rhodesiense.Planta Med. 1999, 65, 536–540. [CrossRef]59. Joshi, K.C.; Singh, P.; Taneja, S.; Cox, P.J.; Howie, R.A.; Thomson, R.H. New terpenoid aldehydes fromKigelia pinnata: Crystal structure of pinnatal. Tetrahedron 1982, 38, 2703–2708. [CrossRef]60. Atawodi, S.; Olowoniyi, O. Pharmacological and Therapeutic Activities of Kigelia africana (Lam.) Benth.Annu. Res. Rev. Biol. 2014, 5, 1–17. [CrossRef]61. Bharti, N.; Singh, S.; Fermida, N.; Amir, A. Isolation and in vitro anti-amoebic activity of iridoids isolatedfrom Kigelia pinnata. Arkivoc 2006, 10, 69–76.62. Gouda, Y.G.; Abdel-baky, A.M.; Darwish, F.M.; Mohamed, K.M.; Kasai, R.; Yamasaki, K. Iridoids fromKigelia pinnata fruits. Phytochemistry 2003, 3, 887–892. [CrossRef]63. Sainadh, N.S.; Nagarathna, P.K.M.; Kumar, V.C.; Kulkarni, S.C. Evaluation of Anti-Cancer Activity ofKigelia africana on EAC Induced Breast Tumors. Int. J. Pharm. Sci. Rev. Res. 2013, 2, 78–84.64. Zom, B.; Garcia-Piñeres, A.J.; Castro, V.; Murillo, R.; Mora, G.; Merfort, I. 3-Desoxyanthocyanidins fromArrabidaea chica. Phytochemistry 2001, 56, 831–835.65. Reller, L.B.; Weinstein, M.; Jorgensen, J.H.; Ferraro, J.M. Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing: A Review ofGeneral Principles and Contemporary Practices. Arch. Clin. Infect. Dis. 2009, 49, 1749–1755. [CrossRef]Plants 2020, 9, 753 33 of 3566. Hamza, O.J.; Bout-vanden Beukel, C.J.; Matee, M.I.; Moshi, M.J.; Mikx, F.H.; Selemani, H.O.; Mbwambo, Z.H.;Van der Ven, A.J.; Verweij, P.E. Antifungal activity of some Tanzanian plants used traditionally for thetreatment of fungal infections. Arch. Clin. Infect. Dis. 2006, 108, 124–132. [CrossRef]67. King, A. Recommendations for susceptibility tests on fastidious organisms and those requiring specialhandling. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 2001, 48, 77–80. [CrossRef]68. Wood, G.L. In vitro testing antimicrobial agents. Infect. Dis. Clin. N. Am. 1995, 9, 463–481.69. Matuschek, E.; Brown, D.F.J.; Kahlmeter, G. Development of the EUCAST disk diffusionantimicrobial susceptibility testing method and its implementation in routine microbiology laboratories.Clin. Microbiol. Infect. 2014, 20, O255–O266. [CrossRef] [PubMed]70. Reynolds, J.F.; Noakes, T.D.; Schwellnus, M.P.; Windt, A.; Bowerbank, P. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatorydrugs fail to enhance healing of acute hamstring injuries treated with physiotherapy. SAMJ S. Afr. Med. 1995,85, 517–522.71. Vane, J.R.; Botting, R.M. Anti-inflammatory drugs and their mechanism of action. J. Inflamm. Res. 1998,47, 78–87. [CrossRef] [PubMed]72. Maroon, J.C.; Bost, J.W.; Maroon, A. Natural anti-inflammatory agents for pain relief. Surg. Neurol. Int. 2010,1, 25–32.73. Frantz, B.; Nordby, E.C.; Bren, G.; Steffan, N.; Paya, C.V.; Kincaid, R.L.; O’neill, E.A. Calcineurin acts insynergy with PMA to inactivate I kappa B/MAD3, an inhibitor of NF-kappa B. EMBO J. 1994, 13, 861–869.[CrossRef]74. Kamau, K.J. Antipyretic and Anti-Inflammatory Properties of Methanolic Extracts of Kigelia africana (Lam.)Benth and Acacia hockii de Wild in Animal Models. Master’s Thesis, School of Pure and Applied Sciences,Kenyatta University, Nairobi, Kenya, 2016.75. Winter, C.A.; Risley, E.A.; Nuss, G.W. Carrageenan-induced edema in hind paw of the rat as an assay foranti-inflammatory drugs. Exp. Biol. Med. 1962, 111, 544–547. [CrossRef]76. Bamgbose, S.O.A.; Noamesi, B.K. Studies on cryptolepine inhibition of carrageenan-induced edema.Planta Med. J. 1981, 41, 392–396. [CrossRef]77. Namita, P.; Mukesh, R.; Tirath, K. Evaluation of anti-inflammatory potential of Kigelia pinnata leaf extract inwistar rats. Asian J. Pharm. Clin. Res. 2012, 5, 95–97.78. Irwin, S.; Houde, R.W.; Bennett, D.R.; Hendershot, L.C.; Seevers, M.H. The effects of morphine methadoneand meperidine on some reflex responses of spinal animals to nociceptive stimulation. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther.1951, 101, 132–143.79. Karau, G.M.; Njagi, E.N.M.; Machocho, A.K.; Wangai, L.N.; Kamau, P.N. Hypoglycemic activity of aqueousand ethyl acetate leaf and stem bark extracts of Pappea capensis in alloxan-induced diabetic BALB/C mice.Br. J. Pharmacol. Toxicol. 2012, 3, 251–258.80. World Health Organisation (WHO). World Malaria Report; WHO: Geneva, Switzerland, 2018;ISBN 978-92-4-156483-0.81. Akah, P.A.; Orisakwe, E.A.; Gamaniel, K.S.; Shittu, A. Evaluation of Nigerian traditional medicines: II. Effectsof some Nigerian folk remedies on peptic ulcer. J. Ethnopharmacol. 1998, 62, 123–127. [CrossRef]82. Weiss, C.R.; Moideen, S.V.K.; Croft, S.L.; Houghton, P.J. Activity of extracts and isolated naphthoquinonesfrom Kigelia pinnata against Plasmodium falciparum. J. Nat. 2000, 63, 1306–1309. [CrossRef]83. Gesslera, M.C.; Nkunyab, M.H.H.; Mwasumbic, L.B.; Heinrichd, M.; Tannera, M. Screening Tanzanianmedicinal plants for antimalarial activity. Acta Trop. 1994, 56, 65–77. [CrossRef]84. Akeng’a Ayuko, T.A.; Njau, R.N.; Wanjala, C.; Nyangasi, L.; Ndiege, O.I. In vitro anti-plasmodial activityand toxicity assessment of plant extracts used in traditional malaria therapy in the Lake Victoria Region.Mem. Inst. Oswaldo Cruz. 2009, 104, 689–694. [CrossRef]85. Desjadins, R.E.; Canfield, C.J.; Haynes, J.D.; Chulay, J.D. Quantitative assessment of anti-malarial activityin-vitro by semi-automated microdilution technique. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 1979, 16, 710–718.[CrossRef]86. O’Neill, M.J.; Bray, D.H.; Boardmann, P.; Phillipson, J.D.; Warhurst, D.C. Plants as sources of anti-malarialdrugs. Part 1. In vitro test method for the evaluation of crude extracts from plants. Planta Med. 1985,51, 394–398. [CrossRef] [PubMed]Plants 2020, 9, 753 34 of 3587. Deharo, E.; Bourdy, G.; Quenevo, C.; Munoz, V.; Ruiz, G.; Sauvain, M. A search for natural bioactivecompounds in Bolivia through multidisciplinary approach. Part V. Evaluation of the anti-malarial activity ofplants used by the Tacana Indians. J. Ethnopharmacol. 2001, 77, 91–98. [CrossRef]88. Krettli, A.U.; Andrade-Neto, V.F.; Brandão, L.M.; Ferrari, W.M.S. The search for new anti-malarial drugsfrom plants used to treat fever and malaria or plants randomly selected: A review. Mem. Inst. Oswaldo Cruz.2001, 96, 1033–1042. [CrossRef] [PubMed]89. Hiatt, R.A.; Dales, L.G.; Friedman, G.D.; Hunkeler, E.M. Frequency of urolithiasis in a prepaid medical careprogram. Am. J. Epidemiol. 1982, 115, 255–265. [CrossRef]90. Anderson, E.E.; Rundles, R.W.; Silberman, H.R.; Metz, E.N. Allopurinol control of hyperuricosuria: A newconcept in the prevention of uric acid stones. J. Urol. 1967, 97, 344–347. [CrossRef]91. Robertson, W.O.; Peacock, M. The pattern of urinary stone disease in Leeds and in the United Kingdomin relation to animal protein intake during the period 1960–1980. Urol. Int. 1982, 37, 394–399. [CrossRef][PubMed]92. Road, P.M.; Nadu, T. Biological actions and mechanisms underpinning the Anti-urolithiatic effectiveness ofvarious natural herbal compounds. Int. J. Pharm. Bio. Sci. 2013, 4, 535–547.93. Gupta, A.K.; Kothiyal, P.; Pandey, S. Evaluation of anti-urolithiatic potential of Kigelia africana fruits in albinorats. FABAD J. Pharm. Sci. 2011, 36, 197–205.94. Abhishek, S.; Umesh, K.S.; Umashankar, S.; Niranjan, S.; Vimlesh, M.; Garima, Y. Anti-convulsant activity ofKigelia pinnata bark extract. Int. J. Pharm. Pharm. Sci. 2010, 2, 147–149.95. Owolabi, O.J.; Omogbai, E.K.I. Studies on the anti-diarrhoeal properties of the ethanolic extract ofKigelia africana (Bignoniaceae). Pharmacologyonline 2009, 1, 243–251.96. Akunyili, D.N.; Houghton, P.J.; Raman, A. Anti-microbial activities of the stem bark of Kigelia pinnata.J. Ethnopharmacol. 1991, 35, 173–177. [CrossRef]97. Omonkhelin, J.; Owolabi, O.J.; Omogbai, E.K.I.; Obasuyi, O. Anti-fungal and anti-bacterial activities ofthe ethanolic and aqueous extract of Kigelia africana (Bignoniaceae) stem bark. Afr. J. Biotechnol. 2007, 6,1677–1680. ISSN 1684-5315.98. Sharma, U.S.; Singh, A.; Agarwal, V. Diuretic activity of Kigelia pinnata bark extract. J. Pharmacol. Res. 2010,1, 17–20.99. Owolabi, O.J.; Nworgu, Z.A.M. Anti-inflammatory and anti-nociceptive activities of Costus lucanusianus(Costaceae). Pharmacologyonline 2009, 1, 1230–1238.100. Ponnan, A.; Perumal, R.; Sathiyavedu, T.S.; Arabandi, R. Antioxidant activity measured in different solventfractions obtained from Mentha spicata Linn.: An analysis by ABTS decolorization assay. Asia Pac. J. Clin. Nutr.2006, 15, 119–124.101. Halliwell, B. Oxidative stress and neurodegeneration: Where are we now? J. Chem. 2006, 97, 1634–1658.[CrossRef] [PubMed]102. Brand-Williams, W.; Cuvelier, M.E.; Berset, C. Use of a Free Radical Method to Evaluate Antioxidant Activity.LWT-Food Sci. Technol. 1995, 28, 25–30. [CrossRef]103. Ursini, F.; Maiorino, M.; Morazzoni, P.; Roveri, A.; Pifferi, G. A novel antioxidant flavonoid (IdB 1031)affecting molecular mechanisms of cellular activation. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 1994, 16, 547–553. [CrossRef]104. Emeka, G.; Emmanuel, N.; Victor, N.S.I. Effect of Methanol Leaf and Fruit Extracts of Kigelia africana on SomeBiochemical Parameters of Normal Albino Rats. World Appl. Sci. J. 2014, 31, 1689–1694.105. Olaleye, M.T.; Rocha, J.B. Commonly used medicinal plants exhibit distinct in-vitro antioxidant activitiesagainst hepatotoxins in rat liver. Exp. Toxicol. Pathol. 2007, 58, 433–438. [CrossRef] [PubMed]106. Pisoschi, A.M.; Negulescu, G.P. Methods for total antioxidant activity determination: A review. Anal. Biochem.2011, 1, 106. [CrossRef]107. Apak, R.R.; Gorinstein, S.; Böhm, V.; Schaich, K.; Özyürek, M.; Güçlü, K. Methods of measurement andevaluation of natural antioxidant capacity/activity (IUPAC Technical Report). Pure Appl. Chem. 2013,85, 957–998. [CrossRef]108. Khan, M.R.; Mlungwana, S.M. γ-Sitosterol. A cytotoxic sterol from Markhamia zanzibarica and Kigelia africana.Fitoterapia 1999, 70, 96–97. [CrossRef]109. Houghton, P.J.; Photion, A.; Uddin, S.; Shah, P.; Browning, M.; Jackson, S.J.; Retsas, S. Activity of Extracts ofKigelia pinnata against Melanoma and Renal Carcinoma cell lines. Planta Med. 1994, 60, 430–433. [CrossRef]Plants 2020, 9, 753 35 of 35110. Azuine, M.A.; Ibrahim, K.; Enwerem, N.M.; Wambebe, C.; Kolodziej, H. Protective role of Kigelia africanafruits against benzo[a]pyrene-induced forestomach tumorigenesis in mice and against albumen-inducedinflammation in rats. Pharm. Pharmacol. Lett. 1997, 7, 67–70.111. Momekov, G.; Guenova, M.; Konstantinov, S.; Ionkova, L.; Stoyanov, N.; Yosifov, D. Apoptotic mechanismsof the biotechnologically produced arylnaphtalene lignan justicidin B in the acute myeloid leukemia-derivedcell line HL-60. Pharmacol. Rep. 2014, 66, 1073–1076. [CrossRef] [PubMed]112. Higgins, C.; Bell, T.; Delbederi, Z.; Feutren-Burton, S.; McClean, B.; O’Dowd, C.; Watters, W.; Armstrong, P.;Waugh, D.; Van den Berg, H. Growth inhibitory activity of extracted material and isolated compounds fromthe fruits of Kigelia pinnata. Planta Med. 2010, 76, 1840–1846. [CrossRef] [PubMed]113. Msonthi, J.D.; Magombo, D. Medicinal herbs in Malawi and their uses. Hamdard Med. 1983, 26, 94–100.114. Chivandi, E.; Cave, E.; Davidson, B.C.; Eriwanger, K.H.; Mayo, D.; Madziva, M.T.I. Suppression of Caco-2and HEK-293 cell proliferation by Kigelia africana, Mimusops zeyheri and Ximenia caffra seed oils. Vivo 2012,26, 99–105.115. Hussain, H.; Krohn, K.; Ahmad, U.V.; Miana, G.A.G.I. Lapachol: An overview. Arkivoc 2007, 2, 145–171.116. Tsao, A.S.; Kim, E.S.; Hong, W.K. Chemoprevention of Cancer. CA Cancer J. Clin. 2004, 54, 150–180. [CrossRef]117. Nyarko, A.K.; Okine, L.K.N.; Wedzi, R.K.; Addo, P.A.; Ofosuhene, M. Sub-chronic toxicity studies of theantidiabetic herbal preparation ADD-199 in the rat: Absence of organ toxicity and modulation of cytochromeP450. J. Ethnopharmacol. 2005, 97, 319–325. [CrossRef]118. Firenzuoli, F.; Gori, L. Herbal Medicine Today: Clinical and Research Issues. Evid. Based Complement.Alternat. Med. 2007, 4, 37–40. [CrossRef]119. Ekor, M. The growing use of herbal medicines: Issues relating to adverse reactions and challenges inmonitoring safety. Front. Pharmacol. 2013, 4, 177. [CrossRef]120. Vanherweghem, J.L.; Degaute, J.P. The policy of admission to the education in medicine and dentistry in theFrench-speaking community of Belgium. Acta Clin. Belg. 1998, 53, 2–3. [CrossRef]121. Cosyns, J.P.; Jadoul, M.; Squifflet, J.P.; Wese, F.X.; van Ypersele de Strihou, C. Urothelial lesions in Chinese-herbnephropathy. Am. J. Kidney Dis. 1999, 33, 1011–1017. [CrossRef]122. Ernst, E. Toxic heavy metals and undeclared drugs in Asian herbal medicines. Trends Pharmacol. Sci. 2002,23, 136–139. [CrossRef]123. World Health Organisation (WHO). WHO Policy Perspectives on Medicines—Effective Medicines Regulation:Ensuring Safety, Efficacy and Quality; WHO Headquarter: Geneva, Switzerland, 2003; Available online:https://apps.who.int/medicinedocs/pdf/s4921e/s4921e.pdf (accessed on 2 February 2020).124. Atanasova, A.G.; Waltenbergerb, B.; Pferschy-Wenzig, E.; Linderd, T.; Wawroscha, C.; Uhrine, P.; Temmlf, V.;Wanga, L.; Schwaigerb, S.; Heissa, E.H.; et al. Discovery and resupply of pharmacologically activeplant-derived natural products: A review. Biotechnol. Adv. 2015, 33, 1582–1614. [CrossRef] [PubMed]125. Bonn Guidelines on Access to Genetic Resources and Fair and Equitable Sharing of the Benefits Arising outof their Utilization. Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity. UNEP. 2002. Available online:http://www.cbd.int/abs/bonn.shtml (accessed on 19 November 2019).© 2020 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open accessarticle distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).