Selection of our books indexed in the Book Citation Index in Web of Science™ Core Collection (BKCI)Interested in publishing with us? Contact book.department@intechopen.comNumbers displayed above are based on latest data collected. For more information visit www.intechopen.comOpen access books availableCountries delivered to Contributors from top 500 universitiesInternational  authors and editorsOur authors are among themost cited scientistsDownloadsWe are IntechOpen,the world’s leading publisher ofOpen Access booksBuilt by scientists, for scientists12.2%148,000 185MTOP 1%1546,000ChapterSeed Biology and Phytochemistryfor Sustainable FutureNikhat Farhana, Ripudaman M. Singh,Mohammed Gulzar Ahmed,Thouheed Ansari,Abdul Rahamanulla, Ayesha Sultana,Treesa P. Varghese,Ashwini Somayaji and Abdullah KhanAbstractThe ranking of seeds represents remarkable transition phase for photosynthasisand sexual reproduction, this phase is complex & successful method for sexual repro-duction in vascular plants. As we know that seed containe the genetic repository ofpast & potential for its perpetuation in the future. The dormancy in seeds induced bydesciccation & the hormone abscisic acid (ABA) till the condition in growth becomefavorable. The well developed seeds eliminates requirement of water during sexualreproduction & allows fertilization events to occur over long distances. Germinationof seeds in particular situation and season is determines the interaction betweendormancy and relating factors like phytochemical development to give healthy bio-actives, which strongly influence on the termination of dormancy or initiatin ofgermination and seedling in many plant species like photo-hormons, light, tempera-ture, water, neutrients and mechanical cuse. Seeds of particular plants needs difreentpretreatment to give vigor seedlings even in production so far. The entiteled chapterrepresents amulgumation of agriculturists and life scientists. Recent significant pro-gress has been endorsed in seed physiology to solve the practical issues constantlyassociated with the seeds. The aim & objective of this articale is to enlighten thereader, not only about the different aspects of the seed physiology it also includes thedevelopment of bioactive (secondary metabolites) in the healthy seeds. This resorce ofpice will help researcher to sencitize about the type of healthy bioactive available inthe shalls of seedlings. This could be the reason to isolate the biomolecules from a wellevaluate seeds, seed evalution not only the sorce to get healthy crops in agriculturalscince it also helps so for a phytochemist to get theuraputicaly active biomolecules,without destroying the nature, which could be the value added thought to combatwith the burning issues associated with the existing situation (COVID Omicron, viralinfection and all kinds of disorder associated with the immune system). Henceforth,endorsed personage to give real-time attention to plant propagation, particularly forindigenous tree species and seedling multiplication should be regarded as a primaryneed to make not only a sustainable environment but also become a treasure to fulfillthe needs of industry application in the field of agriculture plus R & D.1Keywords: germination, synthesis, natural molecules, phytochemistry, industry,endorsed, COVID Omicron,R & D1. IntroductionThe Life cycle of flowering plants follows distinct development milestones whichstart beginning from seeds to converting into plants or crops, ultimately enabling newseed production, plants are adaptive to the native environment, and in the time takenfrom fertilization and germination, anything can be done to increase the proportion ofseeds that emerge and the rate at which they do so, will have a large impact on farmersand researcher’s livelihood, a sensitized former knows about mechanisms underlay-ing, development germinability, dormancy and storability to improve the perfor-mance of seeds which involves temperature, moisture, oxygen light and all otherfactors related to storage similarly the natural chemistry research depends on theperceptions of formers working attribute to make healthy seeds which come out withhighly active primary and secondary metabolites. Seeds are considered a major sourceof food hence all information concerning their nutritive value, chemical compositionand quality. Several hormones and chemicals are used to improve the oil, protein, andother economic attributes of seeds. Overall to say seeds are the connection betweenthe past and future. They contain the genetic wisdom of the past and the potential forits perpetuation in future. The natural packaging of the genetic repository remarkablyprotects the germplasm collection. This chapter takes the reader to the world ofhealthy seeds with its repository of chemical composition required and enlighten thereader about the biotechnological research during the last two decade and opened upunprecedented opportunities in any area of basic and applied biological research,plant tissue culture which is important components of plant biotechnology, phyto-chemistry and pharmacological importance put ups the new strategy for theimprovements of cereals, legumes, forest trees, crops plantation, ornamental plant.Nowadays, seed technology is a most important tool to breeders and scientists of planttissue culture and phytochemistry, it has offered a powerful advantage for large-scalemass propagation of elite species [1].2. Germination in the soil and standard establishmentGermination is the fundamental process by which different plant species grow froma single seed into a young plant. This process essentially influences both crops yield andquality, here the seed observes water by the passage of time, chilling, warming,oxygen availability, and light exposure may all operate while initiating the process, therehydration will expand the cell embryo which increases the rate of respiration, andvarious metabolic processes suspended or much reduced during dormancy resume.These events in the life of seeds are associated with anatomical changes in cell organelles(membranous bodies concerned with metabolism), in the cell of the embryo inside thestigma, whereas each seed reacts individually to its microenvironment. A field consistsof a wide range of microenvironments, how seeds establish & germinate under fieldconditions hence the uniformity of crops associated with seedbed preparation (perry1973; Hadas wolf), the performance of crops’ physical and chemical properties is asper the stability climatic uncertainty and traffic history. Hence germination is thepreliminary stage to represent the quality of seeds (Figure 1) [2].2Seed Biology Updates3. Dormancy of the crops & weedsAs discussed, the dormancy of crops & weeds goes on the season. Dormancy is thestate of seeds and buds were alive but not germinating if the process takes place oncethe seedlings get destroyed. Dormancy allows the storage of millions of seeds in thesoil and enables them to grow in flushes over the years. In this context theFigure 1.Diagrammatic representation of part of the molecular signaling and components acting on the termination ofcoat-imposed dormancy and the induction of germination. Broken lines and question marks represent probable butunconfirmed interactions.3Seed Biology and Phytochemistry for Sustainable FutureDOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.106208horticulturist saying will fit onto “One-year seeding seven-year weeding” appropri-ately fit onto the heading, the high persistence of seeds results from their multifacedmechanism important among these are; prolific seed production, vegetative propaga-tion, rapid dispersal, inherent hardiness, evasiveness, self-regeneration, selectiveinvention and weed success. Whereas weeds and seeds are dormant for three reasonsi.e. enforced dormancy, innate dormancy and induced dormancy. Finally, the overallpersistence of weed depends upon its capability to adopt one or more of the above-cited features. A weed species that embodied the majority of these factors is surely ahorrible weed (Figure 2).To conclude seed dormancy has different elaborations based on the differentlookout and thinking of beings, this was a highly complicated phenomenon andweakly understood even though a huge number of publications available on thistopic, as mentioned factors above the complexity are due to mechanical,physiological and biological some time it may be controlled by the environment. Theknown fact of dormancy not only induction and braking but complications wereinterrelated issues with the seed’s anatomy and physiology like seed coat, embryo,cotyledon, endosperm, cell organelles, nuclei, all need much research with the role ofexternal environment on seeds. Weeds are of most concern to farmers as well asresearchers, backup data is available on this but less research relating to seed coatstructure, temperature, pressure, light, hormones synthetic chemical enzymesmetabolites and related chemical factors need to be explored, however seeddormancy and weed is the main issues needs in-depth research to solve the formersresearchers issues related to field environment or chemical composition both areinterrelated vice and versa [3].Figure 2.Flowchart representing changes in dormancy level and termination of dormancy in seed populations and the factorsthat most likely affect each process (source: Reprinted from field crops research 67 [2], R. L. Benech-Arnoldet al.,environmental control of dormancy in weed seed banks in soil, pp. 105–122, copyright 2000, with permission fromElsevier science).4Seed Biology Updates4. Seeds longevity & storageSeeds even if adequately protected while storage the chances are more to undergodeterioration with time, major factors affecting the longevity (life span) of mature,variable and healthy seeds are moisture, storage, temperature and pests. Seeds are ofdifferent species require different storage conditions, some seeds with the hard courtcan be stored at room temperature for several years (42°F to 5.6°C), the actual storageis depending upon the viability and moisture content of the seeds when initiallyplaced in storage, the specific Variety and condition of the storage is an environment,hence keeping seeds in a glass jar with a sealed container including desiccant in the jar,whereas the germination and viability will decline with age of seeds, viability is theability to produce a vigorous seedling. Hence viability decline before germination, soold seeds gives weak seedlings but germinate, some standard tables are given forthe perusal of the readers which are mentioned in the article johnny selected seeds(Figures 3 and 4) Table 1 [4].5. The industrial quality of seedsThe seed plants mean producing another plant thereby perpetuation the species. Thesafe storage will reflect the quality of the seeds and the ability of the plant to provideseeds as stores of nutrients has also made them an attractive food source for human-kind, making the transition from hunter-gatherer to a settled agriculture existence andFigure 3.A model of seed deterioration and its physiological consequences during seed storage and imbibition (source: M. B.McDonald, 1999, seed deterioration: Physiology, repair and assessment, seed science and technology 27:177–237.Reproduced with permission).5Seed Biology and Phytochemistry for Sustainable FutureDOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.106208natural drug discovery process (Table 1) represent grain species utilized as food forman, animal and available bioactive. This development led in turn, to the building ofpermanent dwellings and a wide range of cultural activities. Whereas this bioactiveform of dicotyledonous grains and monocotyledonous grain (cereals), will play a veryimportant role in daily life, in some individual grains causes dietary issues, hence wholegrain and fiber food inclusion will give proper nutrients vitamins and minerals becauseof the increased number of fibers in the diet. Whereas drugs which have food value willbe more sustainable and easily binds to the target part of the cell and enzymes refereethe (Table 1), to be concluded over here if germination to storage all the protocolfollowed properly and seeds and cereals are healthy and loaded with all forms ofnutrients will make them become a source to get healthy bioactive out of it, to utilize asdrug molecule to treat different disorders associated with the human body withoutinvolving harmful synthetic substances. The process of treatment is from “nature tocreature and creature to cure with the sustainable process” [5].6. Phytochemistry of seedsThe phytochemistry associated with the pharmacological and therapeutic effectselicited by plant material, literature survey states seeds were observed to containappreciable amounts of alkaloids flavonoids, anthraquinone, saponin, and terpenoidsand tannin (Table 1). As mentioned above all factors affect on the composition ofchemical constituents. This chapter mainly focuses on the metabolic properties ofhealthy seeds and the benefits to utilize the bioactive as a drug molecules. In addition,Figure 4.Overview of the lipoxygenase pathway. 9-HPOT, 9(S)-hydroperoxytrans-10, cis-12, cis-15octadecatrienoic acid;1-HPOT, 1(S)-hydroperoxy-cis-9, trans-11, cis-15-octadecatrienoic acid. (source: From Loiseau et al., 2001.Reprinted by permission of CABI publishing, Wallingford, Oxon, UK).6Seed Biology UpdatesFamily Examples Descriptions SecondarymetabolitesEndospermic seeds (flower and fruits)CucurbitaceaeCore EudicotsRosid clade(Cucumis melo) In muskmelon seed the embryo issurrounded by a perisperm/endosperm envelope. Callose (B-1,3-glucan deposition in thisenvelope is responsible for theapoplastic semi permeability ofmuskmelon seeds. Theperisperm/endosperm envelopeis weakened prior to thecompletion of germinationPhenols, lipidsfatscarbohydratesvit. B12Fabaceae CoreEudicots RosidCladeFenugreek (trigonellafoenum) graecumcrimsonClover (Trifoliumincarnatum) Lucerne(Medicago Sativa)Only some legume (Fabaceae)seeds are endospermic mostlegume seeds are non-endospermicPhenols, lipidsfatscarbohydrates,fructose,celluloseEuphorbiaceaeCore EudicotsRosid cladeCastor bean (RicinusCommunis)Castor beans seeds(Malpighiales) are a classical seedsystem reserve breakdownPhenols, lipidsfatscarbohydrates,galactoseBrassicaceae CoreEudicots RosidcladeGarden cress (Lepidiumstivum) mouse-earcress(Arabidopsis thaliana)Only some Brassicaceae seeds areendospermic, most Brassicaceaeseeds are non-endospermic.Mature seeds have 1-2 cell layersof endosperm, while Lepidium ofhas a single endosperm cell layer.This Arabidopsis two-stepgermination two species exhibit,as tobacco, We. (distinct testarupture and endosperm rupture)is a promising model system forLepidium found that .(Mülleret al. 2006 endosperm weakeningPhenols, lipidsfatscarbohydratesCestroideae: subgroupTobacco Nicotiana tabacum-Nicotiana other speciespetuniaMature seeds of the Solanaceaefamily usually have an abundantendosperm layer. Wellinvestigated examples tobaccoand tomato, which are modelsystems in are seed biology forthe study of endospermweakening and the regulationof germination by planthormones The Solanaceae familycan .and environmental factors:be divided into two largesubgroupPhenols, lipidsfatscarbohydratesSolanaceae - CoreEudicots Asterid -cladePetunia hybridaSolanoideae: subgrouptomato Lycopersiconesculentum pepper Capsicumannuum Datura (Daturaferox)Cestroideae subgroup ofSolanaceae (tobacco, :(petuniaStraight or slightly bent embryosand prismatic to two-stepgermination (distinct testa,subglobose seeds typicallycapsules as (rupture andPhenols, lipidsfatscarbohydrates,flavonoids,quercetin7Seed Biology and Phytochemistry for Sustainable FutureDOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.106208Family Examples Descriptions Secondarymetabolitesendosperm rupture .fruits :(Salanoideae subgroup ofSolanaceae (pepper, tomatoCurved embryos and flattened,discoid seeds, no visibledistinction beween testa raptureand endosperm rupture, oftenberries as fruitsRubiaceae Core -Eudicots Asterid -cladeCoffee Coffea arabica The coffee embryo is envelopedby an endosperm tissue. Thefully differentiated embryo liesinside an embryo cavity. Theendosperm is surrounded byendocarp, which resembles aseed Endosperm weakening ofcoffee is inhibited by abscisic .coa .(and promoted bygibberellins (GA (acid (ABAPhenols, lipidsfatscarbohydrates,fatsOleaeceae Core -Eudicots Asterid -cladeSyringa species seeds is mainly imposed SyringaLow temperature dormancy bythe mechanical resistance of theendosperm layerPhenols, lipidsfatscarbohydrates,lipidsAsteraceae Core -Eudicots Asterid -cladelettuce Lactuca sativa Lettuce “seeds” are actually fruitsand have 2-3 cell layers ofendosperm weakening Lettuce .endosperm below the pericarphas been demonstrated and thehormonal regulation of lettuceseed germination is similar totobaccoPhenols, lipidsfatscarbohydrates,sugars aglyconApiaceae CoreEudicots - Asteridclade -Celery Apium graveolens Seeds of Apiaceae (Umbelliferae)contain relatively large amountsof living endosperm whichcompletely surrounds a smallembryo located at the micropylarhas been Endospermbreakdown .end of the seeddemonstrated and is promotedby gibberellinsPhenols, lipidsfatscarbohydratesRanunculaceaeBasal Eudicots -Trollius species The seeds of basal angiospermsoften have underdevelopedembryos that are embedded inabundant endosperm tissue.Two-step germination processwith distinct testa rupture andendosperm rupturePhenols, lipidsfatscarbohydratesPoaceae and othermonocot familiesBasal -AngiospermsMonocots -wheat Triticum aestivumbarley Hordeum vulgareMaize (Zea mays)A typical monocot seed withendosperm is onion Alliaceaefamily. In the highly (Alliumcepa) specialized cereal grains/caryopses (wheat, barley, maize)the endosperm can be divided inthe starchy endosperm (starchPhenols, lipidsfatscarbohydrates,amino acids8Seed Biology Updateshealthy seeds and grains are an excellent source of macromolecule and macromolecule.It is observed from the available literature that the seeds which have food value haveproperties to cure different diseases and its element. Moreover, the oldest sacred bookcomposed of an ancient forms of formulation utilized as medicine from seeds (www.britannica.com/topic/Atharvaveda) are Rigveda, Ayurveda, Quran, Bible and other reli-gious scriptures elaborated on the medicinal properties of healthy properties of seeds,Family Examples Descriptions Secondarymetabolitesgrains, food storage, dead cells,flour) and the aleuroneOnion Allium cepa layer (living cell layersurrounding the starchyendosperm). The cereal .embryosare highly specialized in theirstructureFabaceae Core -Eudicots Rosid -cladePea (Pisum sativum) gardenbean Phaseolus vulgarissoybean (Glycine max)Most species of the legumefamily Pisum ) pea (Fabaceae)including and diverse beans have(sativum non-endospermicseeds. The serve as sole foodcotyledons storage organs as inthe case of pea .During embryo.(Pisum sativum) development thecotyledons absorb the foodreserves from the endospermcompletely. In the mature seedthe embryo is enclosed solely bythe testa as the only seedregulation by covering layer. Theethylene of pea seed germinationhas been and seedling emergencestudied in detailPhenols, lipidsfatscarbohydrates,fats proteinsBrassicaceae Core -Eudicots Rosid -cladeRape (Brassica napus) wildmustard (Sinapis alba) wildradish Raphanus sativusMost species of the mustardfamily (Brassicaceae) includingseveral species have non—Brassica cotyledons endospermicseeds. The serve as sole foodstorage organs as described forthe non-endospermic. FabaceaeseedsPhenols, lipidsfatscarbohydratescelluloseSeeds with perispermAmaranthaceaeincl. )Chenopodiaceae) -Core EudicotsCaryophyllid -cladesugar beet (Beta vulgaris)lambsquarters Chenopodiumalbumis diploid maternal Perispermfood storage tissue that originatesfrom the nucellus. It is present inmature seeds of manyCaryophyllales including the((Centrospermae Beta, )Amaranthaceae among the(Chenopodium eudicots, but alsoin basal angiosperms like blackpepper Piperaceae (Piper nigrum)Glucosefructosegalactose,reducing andnon-reducingsugarTable 1.Category of seeds with phytoconstituents belonging to different families.9Seed Biology and Phytochemistry for Sustainable FutureDOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.106208Figure 5.Classification of the cereals, according to the types of proteins intheir grains (source: Adapted from Shewry, 1996.).Figure 6.Representation of triacylglycerol biosynthesis in developing seeds.10Seed Biology Updatesthis chapter emphasizes the consequences of secondary metabolites available in healthyseeds to utilize for the cure, mitigation of different disease, disorders and its elements.Whereas phytochemistry tie-up with agricultural science will solve the burningissues of toddy’ suncontrolled viral infection or boost the immunity as well. Someimportant biosynthesis is given here to focus on the metabolites from a differentforms of seeds (Figures 5 and 6).6.1 Stages of metabolism macromoleculesThe metabolic stage will begin at an early stage of germination and results in theactivity of various enzymes, which are present in the dry seeds or very rapidly becomeactive as seeds imbibe water (Figure 7).6.1.1 Carbohydrates & LipidsSucrose biosynthesis.6.1.2 Sucrose hydrolysisSucrose þH2O !InvertaseGlucoseþ FructoseFigure 7.Overview of starch, sucrose and cellulose synthesis in plants and its regulatory architecture source: Google images(Figures 8 and 9).11Seed Biology and Phytochemistry for Sustainable FutureDOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.1062086.1.3 Protein6.1.4 Metabolisms of phosphate-containing compoundsFigure 8.(SourceRepresentative reaction catalyzed by an aminotransferase (transaminase). 2-Oxoglutarate is commonlycalled α-ketoglutarate. Source: Google images.Figure 9.The biosynthesis of aspartate and asparagine from oxaloacetate. Source: Google images.Figure 10.Metabolism of phosphate content in healthy seeds (source: Prof. Dr. Heshmat Aldesuquy biology lectures).12Seed Biology Updates6.2 Metabolism of nucleic acidThe nucleic acid metabolism will give the important secondary metabolites likemonomers of portions as given here (Figures 10–15) [5–7].6.2.1 Synthesis of amino acid6.2.2 Reductive amination6.2.3 Trans aminationFigure 11.Formations of monomers of amino acids source (source: Prof.Dr. Heshmat Aldesuquy biology lectures).Figure 12.Formation of glutamine (source: Prof.Dr. Heshmat Aldesuquy biology lectures).Figure 13.Formation of aspartic acids (source: Prof.Dr. Heshmat Aldesuquy biology lectures).13Seed Biology and Phytochemistry for Sustainable FutureDOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.1062086.2.4 Amidase synthesis7. Germination stimulating inhibitors affect in chemical compositionThe constituents which inhibit while germination are gabrillic acid (IAA) andindoleic acetic acid (GAB3B) and kinase have been widely investigated as other pre-cursors of germination Auxins, Gibberellins, Cytokinines, Abscisic acid (ABA), Eth-ylene and effect of coumarin and thiourea. Factors affecting germination viability andlife span, external factors affecting life span, stage of germination includes phaseactivation, digestion and translocation. Epicotyl and hypocotyl germination. This isthe stage where seeds can be protected from denaturation and fermentation [8]. Thisis as discussed in the chapter at the beginning.Tables: Seed biology with important phytoconstituents [9, 10].8. Conclusions and future study1.The remarkable development and environmental factors represents the qulity ofseed dormancy and germination. The review explaines the indepth process ofseedlings transition phase from development to metabolic growth of bioactivesin healthy seeds.2.Furthermore the hormone ABA is essential for development of seeds untilthe condition become favorable. This background analysis not only putforward the metabolic process in healthy developed seeds, but also helpsagriculturist & phytochemist to choose an healthy seeds to isolate vigorrepository in nutshell.Figure 14.Formation of glutamine (source: Prof.Dr. Heshmat Aldesuquy biology lectures).Figure 15.(source: Prof.Dr. Heshmat Aldesuquy biology lectures).14Seed Biology Updates3.The well evalvated seed will be the perfect repository of secondry metaboliteswhich helps to Maintaining of healthy lifestyle by combate with the disorder anddisease associated with the leaving species.4.Whatever this seeds floting on water, blown with air, carried away by animal orchoosen by scientist they are the healthy babys (Seeds) scattered to expanding thegeography and phytochemistry, thus avoiding the competation with parent plant.5.To be conclusion the highly ranked seeds eliminate water requirement duringsexual reproduction and allow fertilization events to occurs over long distance,where as the seeds of different plant needs different pretreatment to get vigorseedling for production of healthy crops even to isolation the healthy biomolecules.6.We endup by saying real attention to be focused on plant propagation,particularly indigenous tree species and seedling multiplication should be ourpreamble to make sustainable environment. if environment is sustainable the lifescience research will flowrished in right way.9. Future aspectsThe regulatory issues facing both protection and maintenance, will make industryready seeds, which will be healthy foods with proper nutrients. Hence it was a greatdeal to focus on seed production, protection and maintenance. The phytochemistryplay an impotent role to isolate the bioactive from healthy seeds based on theirmetabolic pathway able to isolate different macromolecules and micromoleculeswhich can be converted into drug molecule with food value which do not produce anykinds of adverse effect on the human physiological system,Yes seed refuses to die when it get bury it become tree, when dirt through on it willincreased its value, when seed wants to rise it dropes everything that is weighing itdown. When crushed it will be the property of medicine. Grower-friendly, crop-friendly, environment-friendly and ultimately Drug molecule-friendly.AcknowledgementsAuthor immensely grateful to the management of YPCRC, Yenepoya (Deemed tobe University) and the book publishing family for allowing me to become a part of thisnovelty work. Last but not least my heartfelt thanks to the Dean of YPCRC’s guidancesupport. I never deny the support and love of my children and family for providingme the quality time to draft this chapter.Conflict of interestThe author declared no conflict of interest.Notes/Thanks/Other declarationsThanks to the publishing house for allowing me to contribute.15Seed Biology and Phytochemistry for Sustainable FutureDOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.106208Acronyms and AbbreviationsACC acetyl-CoA carboxylaseFAS fatty acid synthetaseSAD stearoyl-ACP desaturaseODS oleoyl-phosphatidylcholine desaturaseLDS Linoleoyl-Phosphatidylcholine desaturasePC PhosphatidylcholineATP Adenosine triphosphateABA Abscisic acidAuthor detailsNikhat Farhana1*, Ripudaman M. Singh2, Mohammed Gulzar Ahmed1,Thouheed Ansari3, Abdul Rahamanulla1, Ayesha Sultana1, Treesa P. Varghese1,Ashwini Somayaji5 and Abdullah Khan41 Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Yenepoya Pharmacy College andResearch Center, Yenepoya (Deemed To Be University) Mangalore, India2 UIPS, Chandigarh University, Gharuan, Punjab, India3 Dr. Noor Mohammed Khan General Hospital, Hafr Al Batin, KSA4 Centre of Excellence for Pharmaceutical Sciences (CoEPS), School of Pharmacy, KPJHealthcare University College, Nilai, Malaysia5 Nitte University, Mangaluru, India*Address all correspondence to: nik.nida13ada25@gmail.com©2022TheAuthor(s). Licensee IntechOpen. This chapter is distributed under the terms oftheCreative CommonsAttribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0),which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in anymedium, providedthe originalwork is properly cited.16Seed Biology UpdatesReferences[1]Nonogaki H. Seed biology updates –Highlights and new discoveries in seeddormancy and. Germination. 2017;8(April):1-16[2] Cbf IOF. Seed biology – From lab tofield. Journal of Experimental Botany.2017;68(4):761-763[3]Nonogaki H. Seed biology updates –highlights and new discoveries in seeddormancy and germination research.Frontiers in Plant Science. 2017;11:1-16[4] Ashwlayan VD, Antlash C, Imran M,Asdaq SMB. Insight into the biologicalimpact of COVID-19 and its vaccines onhuman health. Saudi Journal ofBiological Science. 2022;29(5):3326-3337[5]Hern A. Seed science research: Globaltrends in seed biology and technology.Seeds. 2022;1:1-4[6] Bareke T. Biology of seeddevelopment and germinationphysiology. Advances in Plants andAgricultural Research. 2018;8(4):335-346[7] Benech-arnold RL, Sánchez RA.Handbook of Seed Physiology.New York – London: The Haworth Press;2005[8] Ave B, MEP F. Seed Storage Guide.Vol. 955. Johnny’s Selected Seeds; 2021.pp. 1-5[9]Duval M, Gallardo K, Catusse J,Bally J, Job C, Job D. Seed germinationand vigor. Annual Review of PlantBiology. 2012;63:507-533[10]Adeosun AM, Oni SO, Ighodaro OM,Durosinlorun OH, Oyedele OM.Phytochemical, minerals and free radicalscavenging profiles of Phoenixdactilyfera L. seed extract. Journal ofTaibah University Medical Sciences2016;11(1):1–6. Available from:DOI: 10.1016/j.jtumed.2015.11.00617Seed Biology and Phytochemistry for Sustainable FutureDOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.106208