Sessou et al. DOI:
Submitted to:
International Journal of Phytomedicine
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Phytochemistry and antibacterial activity
of plants extracts compared with two
commercial antibiotics against E coli
responsible for avian colibacillosis in
Benin
Philippe Sessou1,2*, Bruno Ayaovi Yaovi1, Mahudro Yovo2, Judicaël Gamedjo1, François Dossa1, Os-
car Nestor Aguidissou1, Kadoeito Cyrille Boko1, Guy Alitonou2, Souaïbou Farougou1 and Dominique
Sohounhloue2
Abstract
Despite its prominent place in development strategies, poultry breeding faces many constraints, including pathological ones.
Among pathologies that affect poultry, colibacillosis is one of the most diseases that are communicable to humans and associated
with heavy economic losses. To fight efficiently against avian colibacillosis, the work aimed to evaluate antimicrobial potential
evaluation of non-volatile extracts of Euphorbia hirta and Psidium guajava, as well as the essential oils of Clausena anisata and
Aeollanthus pubescens extracts and two commercial antibiotics namely tetracolivit and Oxytetracyclin against Escherichia coli. To
achieve this goal, susceptibility tests were performed on a strain of E. coli using agar diffusion and microdilution methods. Results
obtained showed that essential oils from Clausena anisata and non-volatile extracts tested were not active on E coli. However, the
essential oils extracted from Aeollanthus pubescens were active on the E. coli with MIC of 0.44 ± 0.21 mg/ml and MBC of 0.87 ±
0.41mg / ml for the oil of the whole part, followed respectively by flower oil (MBC = 0.99 mg/ml) and leaf stem oil (MBC= 1.62 mg /
ml). Comparing the activity of the essential oils of Aeollanthus with antibiotics tested, we noticed that tetracolivit was more active
with MBC =0.15±0.07mg/ml on E. coli than these extracts which were more active than Oxytetracyclin (MBC=2.34±1.11mg/ml).
In sum, the study showed that for a better management of avian collibacillosis in Benin, the tetracolivit is suitable as antibiotic
which can be substituted by Aeollanthus pubescens essential oils.
Keywords: Avian colibacillosis; plant extracts; E coli; antibacterial activity
*Correspondence: philippe.sessou@epac.uac.bj
1Laboratory of Research in Applied Biology/ Unit of Research in
Biotechnology of Animal Health and Production, Polytechnic School of
Abomey-Calavi,, University of Abomey-Calavi, 01 BP 2009, Cotonou,
Republic of Benin
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article.
Introduction
Benin poultry farming has made great progress in recent
decades. The number of poultry, all species combined, increased
from 13 million in 2001 to more than 16 million in 2005 [1].
Today, the numbers have increased as a result of increased food
needs and the growth of peri-urban poultry farming [2]. Ac-
cording to livestock management statistics, poultry is the second
largest source of meat consumption after cattle (58% for cat-
©2018 Advanced Research Journals
Sessou et al. Submitted to International Journal of Phytomedicine Page 2 of 7
tle, 21% for poultry, 13% for sheep / goats and 7% for pork)
in Benin [3]. However, the intensification of poultry rearing
does not evolve without problems, because it is accompanied by
many constraints, including pathological ones (viral, bacterial,
parasitic, etc.) which seriously affect the budget of livestock
farmers [4]. Among the main bacterial pathologies occurring
in laying hen farms, we have avian colibacillosis [5], which,
due to strains of Escherichia coli, causes significant economic
losses (estimated about 6 million euros per year in England) due
to stunting, septicemia, associated chronic respiratory condi-
tions and conditions such as salpingitis, ovaritis, aerosacculitis,
pericarditis and severe peri-hepatitis [6,7]. To control this avian
pathology, the current treatment is based on the use of synthetic
antibiotics including colistin, oxytetracyclin, second-generation
fluoroquinolones, beta-lactams, etc. However, the misuse of
these synthetic molecules, the high cost and inaccessibility of
antibiotics, the non-knowledge of the disease by breeders and
the lack of a quality control structure for pharmaceuticals have
led to a worrying increase in the number of multi-resistant
pathogenic strains. For example, strains of E. coli isolated from
chickens showed high levels of resistance to oxytetracyclin
(100%), amoxicillin (90.9%), trimethoprim + sulphamethoxa-
zole (82.2%), enrofloxacin (75.9%) and florfenicol (61.5%) [8].
Regarding the increasing of resistance of E coli to conventional
antibiotics, the emergence of new pathogens in both humans
and animals, the increase in treatment costs, the decline in their
effectiveness, antibiotics do not always guarantee a favorable
response [9]. It is therefore clear that the search for alternative
solutions to ensure a satisfactory succession of antibiotics in
terms of zootechnical effects becomes an emergency. Fortu-
nately, medicinal plants are a significant source of new drugs,
especially since they have fewer side effects [10]. To remedy this
problem of resistance and preserve animal and public health, the
present work was undertaken to evaluate the antibacterial activi-
ties of extracts from medecinal plants whose traditional uses and
therapeutic properties have been widely demonstrated in view of
their uses to the detriment of antibiotics. Thus, the present work
has objective to evaluate antibacterial activity of non-volatile
extracts of the whole part of Euphorbia hirta and the leaves
of Psidium guajava, as well as the essential oils of Clausena
anisata and Aeollanthus pubescens on a strain of Escherichia
coli isolated in poultry.
Material and Methods
Collect and identification of plant material
The studied plant material is consisted of four plants, includ-
ing Psidium guajava leaves harvested in Lokossa municipal-
ity and the whole Euphorbia hirta plant harvested in Abomey-
Calavi identified respectively as AA 6718 /HNB and AA 6719 /
HNB at the National Herbarium of Benin (HNB). The leaves of
Clausena anisata harvested by Adjalian et al. [11] and the organs
(whole plant, flowers and leafy stem) of Aeollanthus pubescens
harvested at Dassa (Benin) and previously studied by Alitonou
et al. [12] and identified by the National Herbarium of Benin
(HNB) during other projects are parts of our plant material.
Microorganism tested and antibiotics assayed
The Escherichia coli tested in the present was isolated from
fresh diarrhea of poultry suffering for colibacillosis. The isolate
was identified according to standard method using Mac Con-
key agar medium and API 20E Kit. Two commercial antibiotics
namely Tetracolivit and Oxytetracylin were purchased in veteri-
nary pharmacy in Benin. They are in powder form.
MethodsExtraction of essential oils from plants
The essential oils were extracted from the leaves of Clausena
anisata and flowers, leafy stem and whole part of Aeollanthus
pubescens. Extraction of the essential oils was carried out by
hydrodistillation using a Clevenger type apparatus according to
protocol reported by Yovo et al. (2016). The essential oils ob-
tained were collected in a sterile dark is kept in the refrigerator at
4◦C and protected from light until use. Oils from the same plants
were previously extracted and analyzed chemically respectively
by Adjalian et al. [11] and Alitonou et al. [12].
Preparation of non-volatile extracts
The crude extracts were prepared from the whole part of E. hirta
and P. guajava leaves. The technique used is that of maceration.
50 g of powder of each sample were macerated in 500 ml of
extraction solvent, filtrated and evaporated for drying in an oven
at 50 ◦ C according to protocol reported by Yovo et al. [13].
Phytochemical Screening
The identification of metabolites such as saponosides, tannins,
flavonoids, alkaloids, coumarins, anthocyanins, leucoantho-
cyanins, reducing compounds, mucilages, and sterols and ter-
penes was made by staining and / or precipitation specific for
most families of secondary metabolites according to the meth-
ods reported by Yovo et al. [13]. The identification of these
secondary metabolites concerned only extracts of E. hirta and P.
guajava.
Sessou et al. Submitted to International Journal of Phytomedicine Page 3 of 7
Quantitative Analysis of Phenolic Compounds of E.
hirta and P. guajava extracts
Total phenols content of extracts
The determination of total phenols was carried out with the
Folin-Ciocalteu reagent according to the method described by
Wong et al. [14]. This method consists of mixing 3 mL of dis-
tilled water with 50 µL of extract followed by 250 µL of Folin-
ciocalteu reagent and 750 µL of 7% Na2CO3. After 8 min,
950 µL of distilled water was added to the mixture and the
absorbance was measured at 765 nm after 2 hours against a
blank without extract taken as reference. The quantification of
the polyphenols is determined by the calibration line made with
gallic acid at different concentrations under the same conditions
as the sample. The results are expressed in mg of gallic acid per
gram of dry material (mg GAE/g dry material).
Total flavonoids content of extracts
The aluminum trichloride (AlCl3) method described by Enuji-
ugha [15] reported by Yovo et al. [13] was used to quantify the
flavonoids in the extracts. 2.5 mL of distilled water were mixed
with 500 µL of extract, 300 µL of NaNO2 and 300 µl of 10%
AlCl3 in ethanol. After 5 min, 1 mL of molar NaOH and 400
µL of distilled water were added and the absorbance was read
with spectrophotometer at 510 nm against a blank without ex-
tract taken as reference. Quantification of total flavonoids was
performed using the standard curve made with catechin at differ-
ent concentrations. The results were expressed in mg equivalent
of catechin per gram of dry matter (mgEC / gMS).
Evaluation of the antibacterial activities of the extracts of the
studied plants
The antibacterial properties of the extracts were determined by
two methods, namely the Mueller Hinton disk diffusion and well
diffusion method, to preselect the extracts having effective an-
tibacterial activity and the liquid microdilution method using
the 96-well microplates to determine minimum inhibitory (MIC)
and bactericidal (CMB) concentrations, as well as antibiotic po-
tency [16].
Disc and well diffusion methods
The evaluation of the antibacterial activity of the various ex-
tracts was previously carried out by the disk diffusion method
and wells on the Mueller-Hinton agar medium, in order to iden-
tify the active extracts on which subsequent studies will be con-
ducted [16]. The test solutions were prepared at the concentra-
tion of 100 mg / mL with sterile distilled water for the aque-
ous extracts and ethanol / water (4/6) for the semi-ethanolic and
ethanolic extracts. For essential oils, the pure extracts have been
tested. Microbial suspensions in the exponential growth phase
(0.5 on the Mc Farland scale, ie approximately 1.5 × 106 cells /
mL) were inoculated on sterile MHA agar. Sterile disks impreg-
nated with 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 10 µL of essential oil were deposited
on the previously inoculated MHA agar. For the non-volatile ex-
tracts, 25 µL of extract were introduced into the 6 mm diameter
wells in the center of the previously inoculated MHA agar. After
pre-diffusion for 30 min at room temperature, the Petri dishes
were incubated for 18-24 hours at 37 ◦ C. The test was done in
duplicate. The diameters of the inhibition zones were measured
and the averages were calculated. Non-volatile extracts with an
inhibition diameter greater than or equal to 12 mm [17] and es-
sential oils having a diameter greater than 14 mm at 10 µL [16],
were selected for the determination of MIC, MBC and antibiotic
potency. In addition, the sensitivity of the E. coli strain to two
commercial antibiotics, namely Tetracolivit and Oxytetracyclin
were treated under the same conditions as the non-volatile ex-
tracts.
Microdilution method in a liquid medium
MIC and MBC were determined using the liquid microdilu-
tion method using 96-well microplates as reported by Mamadou
Sadou et al. [17] and Yovo et al. [13]. From a stock solution at
100 mg / mL for the non-volatile extracts and a suspension pre-
pared from 40 µL of the pure essential oil diluted in 2000 µL of
MHB, a successive dilution was performed well per well with
Mueller-Hinton Broth and microbial suspension broth at 1.5 x
106 cells / mL. The extract solution diluted in MHB alone is
taken as a negative control and the microbial suspension with
MHB alone is considered as a positive control. The microplates
thus seeded are coated with paraffin oil and incubated at 37 ◦
C for 24 hours. The MIC of the extract on the strain is the low-
est concentration corresponding to the well for which turbidity is
not observed. From the MIC, wells showing no visible microbial
growth were re-isolated on Mueller-Hinton Agar and incubated
at 37 ◦ C for 24 hours. The lowest concentration for which no
microbial colonies (99.99% killed) is observed is the Minimal
Bactericidal Concentration (MBC) of the extract on the strain
tested [17].
Antibiotic potency
To better appreciate the antimicrobial properties of the tested
samples, the ratio MBC/MIC was calculated for each extract was
calculated to indicate a bactericidal (MBC/MIC≤4) or bacterio-
static (MBC/MIC>4) activity [18].
Statistical analysis
The results obtained from two independent tests were processed
using the Excel spreadsheet to calculate averages. The latter
Sessou et al. Submitted to International Journal of Phytomedicine Page 4 of 7
were compared two by two by the student’s t-test using the
Statistica software. The level of significance retained is 5% (p
<0.05).
Results and discussion
Main metabolites of non-volatile extracts studied
The secondary metabolites identified in the extracts of the plants
studied are shown in Table 1. The analysis of this table shows
that the extracts of the four plants all contain flavonoids, cate-
chin tannins, sterols and terpenes. However, gallic tannins are
present in the extracts of E. hirta. As for the saponosides and
anthocyanins, they are contained in the extracts of P. guajava.
Leucoanthocyanans are present in extracts of P. guajava; reduc-
ing compounds and mucilages are present in extracts of E. hirta.
The extracts of P. guajava also contain mucilages. Coumarins
are absent in all plants. Regarding these secondary metabolites
identified in the extracts, the presence of flavonoids, tannins, ter-
penes and sterols in our semi-ethanolic extract of E. hirta sam-
ple is in agreement with the results obtained by Ayéna et al. [19]
and Sadou Nassirou et al. [20] respectively with samples har-
vested in the Municipality of Aplahoué in southern Benin and
with the aerial part of E. hirta harvested in Niger. However, we
note the presence of alkaloids in the samples of the Municipality
of Aplahoué and Niger, unlike our sample that does not. Regard-
ing the leaf extracts of P. guajava, the secondary metabolites
identified in our sample are also present in the hydroethanolic
extract of P. guajava leaves studied in India by Gurpreet et al.
[21]. These secondary metabolites are present in the leaves of
P. guajava studied in Mali by Maïga [22], but the anthocyanins
present in our sample, are absent in that of Mali and the alka-
loids, coumarins and gallic tannins present in the sample from
Mali, are absent in our case. This variation of secondary metabo-
lites observed in our samples compared to previous work, could
be related to various factors namely the geographical origin, the
nature of the soil, the mode of extraction, the fresh or dry plant
material, the organ of the plant used and the conditions of anal-
ysis [23, 24].
Levels of phenolic compounds in the extracts of the plants
studied
Based on the absorbance values of the various extract solu-
tions and referring to the calibration curves, the total phenol
and flavonoid contents were calculated. The analysis in Table
2 reveals that all plants are richer in total phenols than in total
flavonoids. The ethanolic extract of P. guajava leaves has the
highest content of total phenols with an average of 3.39x105±
126.26 mg GAE /g of dry material and the aqueous extract of
E. hirta, the lowest content that is equal at 5.5x104± 757.61 mg
Table 1 Secondary Metabolites identified in the extracts of the plants
studied
Secondary
metabolites
Euphorbia hirta Psidium guajava
EE ESE EA EE ESE EA
Flavonoids + + + + + +
Catechic tanins + + + + + +
Gallic Tanins + + + - - -
Saponosides - - - + + +
Sterols et terpens + + + + + +
Leucoanthocyans - - - + + +
Anthocyans - - - + + +
Alkaloids - - - - - -
Reducing compounds + + + - - -
Mucilages + + + + + +
Coumarins - - - - - -
+: Presence; -: Absence; EE: Ethanolic extract;ESE: Semi ethanolic ex-
tract; EA: Aqueous extract
GAE/g of dry material. As for the total flavonoid contents, the
highest content is noted in the ethanolic extract of P. guajava
with a value of 400.84 ± 13.98 mg CE/g of dry material.
Table 2 Phenolic compound content of extracts
Extracts E. hirta P. guajava
Total Phenols
(mg GAE/g
dry
material)
EE 1.67x105±252.53bA 3.39x105±126.26aA
ESE 1.53x105±631.34B 2.83x105±126.26aB
EA 5.51x104±757.61bC 2.15x105±126.26aC
Total
flavonoids
(mg CE/g of
dry
material)
EE 146.94±7.77bB 400.84±13.98aA
ESE 162.70
±17.09bAB
373.74±27.97aA
EA 165.52±8.54bA 275.98±18.65aB
EE: Ethanolic Extract, ESE: Semi-Ethanolic Extract, EA: Aqueous Ex-
tract;The average values of the same line followed by different letters in
lower caseare significantly different at the 5% threshold. The average
values of the samecolumn followed by different letters in capital letter are
significantlydifferent at the 5% threshold
Sensitivity of the E. coli strain to extracts and antibiotics
The table 3 shows the averages of the diameters of the inhibition
zones of the various extracts on E. coli strain. Analysis of this
table indicates that extracts of E. hirta and P. guajava are not
active on E. coli strain at (100 mg/mL). As for the diameters of
inhibition of essential oils and antibiotics presented in Table 3,
we note that up to 10 µL, the essential oils of Clausena anisata
showed no inhibitory activity on the two strain of E. coli. On the
other hand, the essential oils of the organs of A. pubescens, as
well as the antibiotics tested, showed a good inhibitory activity
on the two strains. Indeed, on the E. coli strain, the largest inhibi-
tion diameter equal to 25.50 ± 2.1 mm, is noted with the essen-
tial oil of the whole plant of A. pubescens. Also, the inhibition
Sessou et al. Submitted to International Journal of Phytomedicine Page 5 of 7
diameter is function of the quantity of oil tested, the more the
quantity increases, the greater the diameter is important. With
respect to the two antibiotics tested, Tetracolivit further inhib-
ited (17 ± 0.0 mm) the strain of E. coli isolated from chickens
than Oxytetracyclin (15.25 ± 1.7 mm).
Minimal inhibitory concentrations (MIC), bactericidal (MBC)
and antibiotic potency of extracts and antibiotics
The results regarding Minimal Inhibitory Concentration, bacte-
ricidal (MBC) and antibiotic potency of the plant extracts and
antibiotics are shown in Table 4. This reveals that on the strain
E. coli, Tetracolivit has the lowest MIC equal to 0.07 ± 0.03
mg / mL and Oxytetracyclin, the highest MIC which is equal to
1.17 ± 0.55 mg / mL. The same trend was noted at the level of
MBC with an average of 0.15 ± 0.07 mg / mL for Tetracolivit
and 2.34 ± 1.11 mg / mL for Oxytetracyclin. This shows that
Tetracolivit is more active on this strain than the essential oils of
A. pubescens which are more active on this strain than Oxyte-
tracyclin. Regarding antibiotic potency, A. pubescens essential
oils and both antibiotics have a bactericidal effect on the E. coli
tested. From the analysis of the results of the sensitivity of the E.
coli strain to the extracts, it appears that the essential oils of the
various organs of A. pubescens are active on the strain of E. coli.
These same results were obtained by Yovo [24], which showed
that these same oils have good antibacterial activity on the refer-
ence strain E. coli ATCC 25922 with MICs of 0.40 mg / ml for
the whole part, 0. , 40 mg / mL for flowers and 0.27 mg / mL for
leafy stem and MBC of 0.80 mg / mL, 0.80 mg / mL and 0.54
mg / mL respectively. We therefore note that these MICs and
MBC are slightly lower than those found in our study, except for
the oil of the stem with the MICs and MBC being three times
lower than those obtained on the E. coli strain used in this study.
our case (0.81 ± 0.38 mg / mL for MIC and 1.62 ± 0.76 mg /
mL for MBC); which shows that the strain of E. coli studied by
Yovo [24] is more sensitive to the essential oils of A. pubescens
than the strain of E. coli used in our study. The antibacterial ac-
tivity of these oils could be attributed to the action of the thymol
they contain or the synergistic action of thymol and other major
compounds such as thymyl acetate, p-cymene, γ-terpinene and
carvacrol [12].
As for E. hirta extracts, no inhibitory activity was observed
on the E. coli strain. However, Ayena et al. [19], have shown
that the hydroethanolic extract of E. hirta has good antibacterial
activity on an E. coli strain isolated from the offending foods
during gastroenteritis, with a minimum inhibitory concentration
of 1.25 mg / mL. Similarly, Nikunj and Kaushik [25] showed that
the aqueous extract of E. hirta has moderate inhibitory activity
on an isolated E. coli strain in patients with a MIC of 50 µg
/ µL. This result obtained in our case, could be related to the
absence of the alkaloids in our sample contrary to that of Ayéna
et al. [19]. Indeed, alkaloids are known to have antimicrobial
properties. The mechanism of action of alkaloids is attributed to
their ability to intercalate with bacterial DNA [26]. With regard
to P. guajava leaves, the inactivity of the extracts of this plant
observed on the E. coli strain in this study is in agreement with
the results obtained by Biswas et al. [27], which showed that the
ethanolic and aqueous extracts of the same plant are not active
on the E. coli strain. However, these results contrast with those
obtained by Suresh et al. [28], which showed that the aqueous
leaf extract of Psidium guajava significantly inhibited E. coli
strain.
With regard to the essential oil of Clausena anisata, our re-
sults are contrary to those obtained by Osei-Safo et al. [29], who
showed that the essential oil of with estragole as chemotype, has
a good antibacterial activity on the strain of E. coli. This dif-
ference in results could be explained by the estragole content.
Indeed, the essential oil of C. anisata used by Osei-Safo et al.
[29] contains estragole at 98.76% and that used in this study [11]
at 69.9%. The antibacterial activity of Tetracolivit consisting of
oxytetracyclin, colistin and vitamins as active ingredients, would
be more related to the action of colistin. Indeed, Rahmatallah et
al. [8] showed that strains of E. coli isolated from broilers had
low levels of resistance to colistin (2.94%), unlike oxytetracy-
clin, for which these strains showed 100% resistance.
Conclusion
Phytochemical analysis revealed that extracts of E. hirta and P.
guajava are rich in flavonoids, catechin tannins, sterols and ter-
penes. With respect to the antibacterial activities of plant extracts
and antibiotics, the study showed that A. pubescens HEs and the
two commercial antibiotics tested had bactericidal activity on
the E. coli isolated from poultry. These oils and antibiotics had
bactericidal activity against the isolate investigated. Extracts of
E. hirta and P. guajava and C. anisata essential oil showed no
antibacterial activity on E. coli isolated from poultry.
Acknowledgments
The authors are very grateful to Polytechnic School of Univer-
sity of Abomey-Calavi for support. They are also thankful to
Professor Dougnon Tossou Jacques for scientific contribution.
Declaration of interest
The authors declare that there is no conflict of interest. The au-
thors alone are responsible for the content of the paper.
Sessou et al. Submitted to International Journal of Phytomedicine Page 6 of 7
Table 3 Averages of the diameters of the inhibition zones of the various extracts on E. coli
Conc/qty Diameters of inhibition zones of essential oils and antibiotics (mm)
100 mg/mL 1 µL 2 µL 3 µL 4 µL 5 µL 10 µL
HE C. anisata - 6,0±0,0Ca 6,0±0,0Ca 6,0±0,0 aD 6,0±0,0 aC 6,0±0,0 aC 6,0±0,0 aC
HE APE - 9,0±1,4BA 10,5±3,5dB 18,0±0,0cB 19,0±1,4bcB 22,5±2,1abA 25,50±2,1Aa
HE APF - 11,0±1,4Aa 18,0±0,0dA 20,0±0,0cA 22±0,0bA 23,0±0,0aA 23,50±0,7aA
HE APTF - 6,0±0,0Cb 10,0±0,0dB 14,5±0,7cC 17,5±0,7bB 17,5±0,7bB 21,50±0,7aB
Oxytetracyclin 15,25±1,7A - - - - - -
Tetracolivit 17±0,0B - - - - - -
The average values of the sameline followed by different letters in lower case are significantly different atthe 5% threshold. The
average values of the same column followed by differentletters in capital letter are significantly different at the 5% threshold;Conc/qty:
concentration/quantity
Table 4 Minimum Inhibitory Concentration (MIC), Bactericides (MBC)
and antibiotic potency of extracts and antibiotics
Ex-
tracts/antibiotics
MIC
(mg/mL)
MBC
(mg/mL)
MBC/
MIC
E. coli
APE 0.44±0.21b 0.87±0.41b 2.00
APF 0.49±0.00b 0.99±0.00b 2.02
APTF 0.81±0.38ab 1.62±0.76ab 2.00
Oxytetracyclin 1.17±0.55a 2.34±1.11a 2.00
Tetracolivit 0.07±0.03c 0.15±0.07c 2.01
APE: Essential oil from wholepart of Aeollanthus pubescens; APF:Essential
oil from flowers of Aeollanthuspubescens, APTF: Essential oil from leaf stem
of Aeollanthus pubescens; The averagevalues of the same column followed by
different letters in lower case aresignificantly different at the 5% threshold.
Authors’ contributions
Philippe Sessou conceived the study and wrote the protocol; he
performed antibacterial assay and wrote the manuscript. Yaovi
and Yovo performed the plant collection and extracts prepartion
and did together phytochemical analysis with the supervision
of Alitonou and Professor Sohounhloue. Dossa has conducted
on the supervision of Philippe Sessou and Boko Cyrille, the fe-
cal sample collection and identification of E coli isolates. Os-
car Aguidissou and Boko helped Philippe Sessou for antibacte-
rial assay and results interpretation. Farougou had supervise the
work. All authors had corrected and approved the final paper.
References
[1] Boko MA, Dougnon TV, Bankole SH, Dougnon TJ,
Ahouangninou C, Cledjo P, Soumanou M. Pratiques d’élevage
avicole au Sud-Bénin (Afrique de l’Ouest) et impacts sur
l’hygiène des fumiers produits. Int. J. Biol. Chem. Sci. 2015
; 9(6): 2740-2753.
[2] Batonon-Alavo DI, Bastianelli D, Chrysostome CAAM,
Duteurtre G, Lescoat P. Securing the flows of feed ingredient
supplies and commercialization of products in the poultry sector:
Case of the egg value chain in Benin [in French]. Rev. Elev. Med.
Vet. Pays Trop. 2015 ; 68 (1): 3-18.
[3] FAO. Secteur Avicole Bénin. Revues nationales de
l’élevage de la division de la production et de la santé animales
de la FAO, 2015.
[4] Abdel-Aziz A. Contribution à la lutte Contre la maladie
de Gumboro : détermination du meilleur protocole vaccination à
partir des vaccins disponibles sur le marché de Dakar. Thèse de
Médecine Vétérinaire de l’EISMV Dakar, Senegal, 2007.
[5] Zerbo LH. Etude préliminaire sur l’utilisation des antibi-
otiques dans les élevages de poules pondeuses et la présence
de résidus d’antibiotiques dans les œufs commercialisés à Oua-
gadougou (Burkina-Faso). Mémoire de diplôme de Master qual-
ité des aliments de l’homme. Thèse de Médecine Vétérinaire de
l’EISMV Dakar, Sénégal, 2014.
[6] Soumaila Garba A. Caractérisation phénotypique et géné-
tique des Escherichia coli isolés des cas de colibacilloses avi-
aires au Sénégal. Thèse de Médecine Vétérinaire de l’EISMV
Dakar, Sénégal, 2012.
[7] Stordeur P, Mainil J. La colibacillose aviaire. Ann.
Méd.Vét. 2002 ; 146 : 11-18.
[8] Rahmatallah N, Nassik S, El-Rhaffouli H, Lahlou
AI, El-Houadfi M. Détection de souches multi-résistantes
d’Escherichia coli d’origine aviaire dans la région de Rabat-
Salé-Zemmour-Zaer.Rev. Mar. Sci. Agron. Vét. 2017 ; 5 (2) :
96-102.
[9] Abdallah NB. Isolement et caractérisation de bactéries à
fort potentiel probiotique à partir du tractus gastro-intestinal de
volaille. Mémoire, Université Laval, 2010.
[10] Sonago R. Le Rôle des Plantes Médicinales en Médecine
Traditionnelle. Développement, Environnement et Santé. 10me
école d’été de l’IEPF et SIFEE du 06 au 10 juin, 2006.
[11] Adjalian E, Sessou P, Alitonou GA, Noudogbessi JP,
Kossou D, Menut C, Sohounhloue D. Ovicide and Larvicide Ac-
tivities of the Essential Oils Extracted from Polyalthia longifolia
and Clausena anisata on Sitotroga cerealella. Online J. Biol. Sci.
2017 ; 17(3):193-200.
Sessou et al. Submitted to International Journal of Phytomedicine Page 7 of 7
[12] Alitonou G, Tchobo F, Avlessi F, Sohounhloue KD,
Menut C. Aeollanthus pubescens Benth. from Benin: A Potential
Source of Essential Oil with High Antiradical Efficiency. JEOP.
2013 ; 16 : 308-314.
[13] Yovo M, Alitonou GA, Yedomonhan H, Tchobo F, De-
dome O, Sessou P, Avlessi F, Menut C, Sohounhloué D. First
report on chemical composition and antimicrobial activity of
Artabotrys velutinus Scott-Elliot extracts against Some Clinical
Strains in Benin. Am. J. Appl. Chem. 2016 ; 4(3): 71-76.
[14] Wong CC, Li HB, Cheng KW, Chen F. A systematic sur-
vey of antioxidant activity of 30 Chinese medicinal plants using
the ferric reducing antioxidant power assay. Food Chem. 2006;
97: 705-711.
[15] Enujiugha VN. The Antioxidant and Free Radical- Scav-
enging Capacity of Phenolics from African Locust Bean Seeds
(Parkia biglobosa). Adv. Food Sci. 2010; 32 (2): 88-93.
[16] Lakhdar L. Evaluation de l’activité antibactérienne
d’huiles essentielles marocaines sur Aggregatibacter actino-
mycetemcomitans : Etude in vitro. Thèse de l’Université Mo-
hammed V de Rabat, 2015.
[17] Mamadou Sadou R, Moussa I, Sessou P, Yehoue-
nou B, Agbangnan PDC, Illagouma AT, Abdoulaye A, So-
hounhloué DCK, Ikhiri K. Etude phytochimique, activités anti-
radicalaire, antibactérienne et antifongique d’extraits de Sebas-
tiania chamaelea (L.) Müll. Arg. J. Soc. Ouest-Afr. Chim. 2014
; 037: 10-17.
[18] Kpadonou-Kpoviessi HGB, Yayi Ladekan E, Kpoviessi
SDS, Gbaguidi F, Yehouenou B, Quetin-Leclerq J, Figueredo J,
Moudachirou M, Accrombessi CG. Chemical variation of essen-
tial oil constituents of Ocimum gratissimum L. from Benin, and
impact on antimicrobial properties and toxicity against Artemia
salina Leach. Biodiversity &Chemistry. 2012 ; 9 : 139-150.
[19] Ayéna AC, Agassounon DTM, Adoukonou-Sagbadja H,
Mensah GA, Agbangla C, Baba-Moussa L, Ahanhanzo C. Po-
tentiels antimicrobiens de Euphorbia hirta L. et de Phyllanthus
amarus Schumach & Thonn, deux Euphorbiaceae utilisées dans
le traitement des gastroentérites au Sud du Bénin. REMISE. 2017
; 11(1) : 1-15.
[20] Sadou Nassirou R, Ibrahim ML, Moussa I, Mahamadou
B, Ilagouma AT, Abdoulaye A, Ouwe MO, Ikhiri K. Evaluation
in vitro de l’activité antiplasmodiale d’extraits de plantes issues
de la pharmacopée traditionnelle du Niger: Sebastiania chamae-
lea (L.) Müll. Arg., Euphorbia hirta L.,Cassia occidentalis L. et
Cassia nigricans (Vahl) Greene. IJIAS. 2015 ; 10(2) : 498-505.
[21] Gurpreet K, Satnam S, Shubham G, Bhartendu S, Sid-
diqui A, Ravinesh M. Phytochemical investigation and evalua-
tion of antianxiety activity on Psidium guajava Linn. leaf. World
J Pharm Pharm Sci. 2017 ; 6(1) : 1332-1341.
[22] Maïga MA. Etude de la chimie et des activités bi-
ologiques de six (6) plantes utilisées dans le traitement tradition-
nel du diabète : Allium cepa; Allium sativum; Daucus carota;
Eucalyptus globulus; Psidium guajava et Solanum melongena.
Thèse de l’U.S.T.T-B Mali, 2014.
[23] Chenni M. Etude comparative de la composition chim-
ique et de l’activité biologique de l’huile essentielle des feuilles
du basilic ‘’Ocimum basilicum L.” extraite par hydro-distillation
et par micro-ondes. Thèse de doctorat, Université d’Iran 1
Ahmed BenBella, 2016.
[24] Yovo M. Etude phytochimique et activités biologiques
des extraits de plantes médicinales utilisées au Bénin dans le
traitement des infections cutanées, urinaires et les septicémies.
Thèse de doctorat, Université d’Abomey-Calavi, 2017.
[25] Nikunj BP, Kaushik CP. Antibacterial activity of Euphor-
bia hirta L. Ethanomedicinal Plant against Gram Negative UTI
Pathogens. Int. J. Pharma Res. Allied Sci. 2014 ; 3 (2) :24-29.
[26] Dongmo MCR. Evaluation des activités antidermatophi-
tiques des extraits au méthanol et fractions d’Acalyphamanniana
(Euphorbiacées) et Tristemma hirtum (Mélastomatacées). Mé-
moire de Master de l’Université de Dschang, Cameroun, 2009.
[27] Biswas B, Kimberly R, Fredrick M, Dwayne D, Anand
Y. Antimicrobial activities of leaf extracts of guava (Psidium
guajava L.) on two gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria.
Int. J. Microbiol. 2013 ; Article ID746165.
[28] Suresh K, Deepa P, Harisaranraj R, Vaira AV. Antimicro-
bial and phytochemical investigation of the leaves of Carica pa-
paya L., Cynodon dactylon (L.) Pers., Euphorbia hirta L., Melia
azedarach L. and Psidium guajava L. Ethnobotanical Leaflets,
2008 ; 12: 1184-91.
[29] Osei-Safo D, Addae-Mensah I, Garneau FX, Kossi
Koumaglo H. A comparative study of the antimicrobial activ-
ity of the leaf essential oils of chemo-varieties of Clausena
anisata (Willd.) Hook. f. ex Benth. Ind. Crops Prod. 2010 ; 32
:634–638.
Author details
1Laboratory of Research in Applied Biology/ Unit of Research
in Biotechnology of Animal Health and Production, Polytech-
nic School of Abomey-Calavi,, University of Abomey-Calavi,
01 BP 2009, Cotonou, Republic of Benin. 2Laboratory of Study
and Research in Applied Chemistry/ Unit of Research on Vegetal
Extracts and Natural Products, Polytechnic School of Abomey-
Calavi, University of Abomey-Calavi, 01 BP 2009, Cotonou,
Republic of Benin.
