Artigo Original DOI:10.5902/2179460X22021
Ciência e Natura, Santa Maria v.38 n.3, 2016, Set.- Dez. p. 1479 – 1486
Revista do Centro de Ciências Naturais e Exatas - UFSM
ISSN impressa: 0100-8307      ISSN on-line: 2179-460X
Recebido: 27/04/2016 Aceito: 10/06/2016
Approach Phytochemistry of Secondary Metabolites of Maytenus guia-
nensis Klotzsch Ex Reissek (Celastraceae)
Abordagem Fitoquímica de Metabólitos Secundários em Maytenus guianensis 
Klotzsch Ex Reissek (Celastraceae)
Renato Abreu Lima1,4, Fernanda Bay-Hurtado2,4, Dionatas Ulises de Oliveira Meneguetti3,4,                
João Bezerra Facundo4, Júlio Sancho Linhares Teixeira Militão4 e Valdir Alves Facundo1,4
1Programa de Pós-Graduação em Biodiversidade e Biotecnologia, Universidade Federal do Amazonas, - Porto Velho, RO
renatoabreu07@hotmail.com
2Pesquisadora, UNIR, Departamento de Zootecnia, Câmpus de Presidente Médici, RO
fernandabay@unir.br
3Colégio de Aplicação e Laboratório de Fisiofarmacologia da Universidade Federal do Acre, Rio Branco, Acre, Brasil
4Laboratório de Pesquisa em Química de Produtos Naturais, Universidade Federal de Rondônia, Porto Velho, RO 
Abstract
The Brazilian Amazon rainforest, even for its richness and biological diversity, can offer the opportunity for innovative and 
efficient discovery of molecules with potential use in large scale. The interest in secondary metabolites have grown tremendously 
in recent years due to its wide use as raw material in the preparation of substances with biological activity. Specifically in 
relation to plants producing amazonian essential oils and plant extracts, the Maytenus guianensis is a shrub native to our 
region, being popularly known as fruit-Werewolf. The leaves are used as anti-inflammatory and infections is also indicated in 
the treatment of arthritis and hemorrhoids. Thus, the present study aimed to identify the classes of secondary metabolites from 
the ethanol extract of the leaves, stems and bark of M. guianensis. We carried out the identification of secondary metabolites 
with plant extract using specific reagents alkaloids, glycosides cardiotonic, coumarins, flavonoids, tannins, saponins and 
triterpenes, based on coloration and precipitation. It was found that all the studied structures show botanical alkaloids, 
coumarins, flavonoids and tannins using any specific reagents. However, the absence of a secondary metabolite cardiotonic 
glycoside was found in most of the tested reagents. The results of this study revealed that this species has secondary metabolites 
which can serve as raw material for synthesis of bioactive substances, particularly drugs and are used in many preparations to 
benefit human health, such as in the production of food and biological activity against microorganisms.
Keywords: Maytenus; Celastraceae; Triterpenes.
Resumo
A Floresta Amazônica Brasileira, devido sua riqueza e diversidade biológica, pode oferecer a oportunidade para descobertas de 
inovadoras e eficientes moléculas com potencial de uso, em larga escala. O interesse em metabólitos secundários tem crescido 
muito nos últimos anos, devido à sua ampla utilização como matéria-prima na preparação de produtos ou formulações com 
atividade biológica, especificamente em relação às plantas amazônicas produtoras de óleos essenciais e extratos vegetais. 
Maytenus guianensis é uma árvore nativa da região Norte, sendo conhecido popularmente como chichuá. Suas folhas são 
utilizadas como anti-inflamatório, no tratamento de infecções, artrite e hemorroidas. Com isso, o presente trabalho teve como 
objetivo identificar as classes de metabólitos secundários do extrato etanólico dos talos, folhas e cascas de M. guianensis. Realizou-
se a identificação de metabólitos secundários com o extrato da planta utilizando reagentes específicos de alcaloides, glicosídeos 
cardiotônicos, cumarinas, flavonoides, taninos, saponinas e triterpenos, reações de precipitação e coloração. Verificou-se que 
todas as estruturas botânicas estudadas apresentaram alcaloides, cumarinas, flavonoides e taninos utilizando todos os reagentes 
específicos. Porém, a ausência do metabólito secundário glicosídeo cardiotônico foi verificado na maioria dos reagentes testados. 
Os resultados obtidos neste estudo revelaram que a espécie estudada apresenta metabólitos secundários que podem servir como 
matéria-prima para a síntese de substâncias bioativas, especialmente fármacos, além de serem utilizados em diversos preparos 
para benefício na saúde humana, como na produção de alimentos e na atividade biológica contra microrganismos.
Palavras-chave: Maytenus; Celastraceae; Triterpenos.
Ciência e Natura v.38 n.3, 2016, p.  1479 – 1486 1480
Introduction
The Brazil is recognized as one of the most expressive 
biodiversity of the biosphere and plays a very important 
role in human welfare and health, by providing basic 
goods and ecosystem services. With over 55,000 des-
cribed species, which corresponds to 22 % of the world 
total, this rich biodiversity is known for harboring many 
species of plants, used over time in medicine, and it is 
directly related to the associated traditional knowledge. 
Approximately 48% of the drugs used in therapy arise, 
directly or indirectly, from natural products, especially 
medicinal plants (ALHO, 2012).
Natural products with antimicrobial activity, from 
plant or microbial, have a prominent importance in 
bioprospecting research since the antibiotics available 
in the market are increasingly ineffective due to the 
emergence of resistant strains, which has become a global 
concern (ANDRADE, 2009). Thus, several studies have 
been conducted aiming the use of natural products as a 
source of active substances against pathogenic bacteria 
(DAS et al., 2007; ZILBERG et al., 2004).
The Amazon forest stands out with the highest flo-
ristic diversity of the world, but there are few studies 
on its chemical and pharmacological potential. Thus, 
this forest has several plant and microbial species that 
may contain non-described secondary metabolites or 
therapeutic potential that was not studied yet, and that 
could be used against various diseases, especially re-
garding diseases caused by bacterial agents (TANAKA 
et al., 2005).
The Celastraceae family comprises about 98 genera 
and about 1,264 species and it may be found throughout 
Brazil (OLIVEIRA et al., 2006; FONSECA et al., 2007). 
There are several studies that demonstrate that the 
principles of the biological interest are associated with 
flavonoids, sesquiterpenes, alkaloids, and pentacyclic 
triterpenes (GONÇALVES et al., 2005; MICHELIN et 
al., 2005; OLIVEIRA et al., 2006).
Maytenus guianensis is a small size tree endemic 
of solid ground in the Amazon; this plant is known as 
chichuá, xixuá, chuchahuasi, chucchu huashu, chuchuasi, 
chuchasha and tonipulmon (DUKE; VÁSQUEZ, 1994; 
REVILLA, 2002).
Its roots and stems are also used as an analgesic, 
anti-inflammatory, aphrodisiac, muscle relaxant, anti
-rheumatic and anti-diarrheal. The tea and ointment, 
made from the leaves of the species, are also indicated 
for the treatment of arthritis, sexual impotence, colds, 
bronchitis, hemorrhoids, worm infections, lumbago, 
external ulcers, and gynecological purposes (BORRÁS, 
2003). As a cosmetic it is used in skin rashes and to pre-
vent the skin cancer (REVILLA, 2002), furthermore, it 
has antiparasitic action (MACARI; PORTELA; POHLIT, 
2006), demonstrating a great ethnopharmacological 
potential to be explored.
Therefore, this study aimed to identify the secondary 
metabolites of botanical structures (leaves, bark and 
stems) of ethanol extracts of M. guianensis.
2 Method
Plant collection
The phytochemical study of the M. guianensis (leaves, 
bark and stems) was carried out at the Research Labora-
tory of Chemistry of Natural Products (LPQPN) of the 
Federal University of Rondônia (UNIR) in Porto Velho, 
Rondônia State, Brazil. The collection of the fresh bark 
of M. guianensis was conducted in the Adolpho Ducke 
Forest Reserve, located at the km 26 in the highway 
Manaus-Itacoatiara (AM-010), Manaus, Amazonas State, 
at the geographic coordinates 0º10’S, 67º05’ W, in 2010 
summer season. The botanical identification was perfor-
med by sending a voucher specimen to the Herbarium of 
the National Institute for Amazonian Research (INPA), 
where it was registered under the number 188,485 and 
identified by the researcher Dr. José Eduardo da Silva 
Ribeiro.
Phytochemical study 
The leaves, bark and stems were adequately dried in 
an electric oven with air circulation at a temperature of 
50 °C for 48 hours. Subsequently, they were ground to 
further increase the contact surface, then, the obtained 
material was subjected to three extractions by percolation 
with 95 % ethanol (P.A.) at room temperature for three 
days, each. After the ethanol evaporation, we obtained 
the ethanolic extract called MGCE. Phytochemical tests 
were performed with the ethanol extract, based on preci-
pitation and coloration of the extracts diluted in specific 
solution and reagents for each test as Matos (2009):
Alkaloids 
To perform the assay we used 2.0 mL of the ethanolic 
solution is added 2.0 mL of hydrochloric acid (10 %), 
which heated the mixture for 10 minutes. After cooling, 
the extract was divided into three test tubes and pla-
ced in eight drops using Pasteur pipette, the reagents 
following recognition:
Tube 1 - Reactive Mayer: watching white precipitate 
formation or light white haze;
Tube 2 - Reactive Dragendorff: watching precipitate 
formation of orange color red;
Tube 3 - Reactive Wagner: observing orange color 
precipitate formation.
Glycosides cardiotonic
A 2.0 mL solution of the extract was added 3.0 mL 
of lead acetate solution 10 % and 2.0 mL of distilled wa-
ter. Heated the mixture in a water bath for 10 minutes. 
Then the extract was filtered and stirred with 10.0 mL 
of chloroform, the chloroform phase separated in 4 test 
tubes. After evaporation of chloroform, the formation of 
1481 Lima et al : Approach Phytochemistry of...
residues in the tubes, which were added the following 
reagents:
Tube 1: was performed Salkowski reaction for the 
determination of steroidal nucleus. going from yellow 
color to purple is a positive result.
Tube 2: 1.0 mL of Reactive Kedde. Pink or blue-violet 
to visible indicates cardenolide the bufadienólidos not 
react. The color attenuates within minutes.
Tube 3: the reaction was carried out Keller-Kiliani 
(glacial acetic acid in a drop III ferric chloride to 5 % 
methanol and concentrated sulfuric acid). intense stai-
ning is positive.
Tube 4: This was the Liebermann-Burchard reaction 
(1.0 mL of sample / few drops of acetic acid + 3.0 mL 
acetic anhydride / sulfuric acid (50: 1, v / v) Positive 
Result: Coloring green, blue-green, purple blue.
Tube 5: This was the reaction Baljet (1.0 mL of sam-
ple / eight drops of acetic acid + 3.0 mL of chloroform). 
Positive result: orange color, purple or red.
Tube 6: This was Raymond reaction (the extract is 
filtered and added 2 drops of ferric chloride solution 
of 10 % + two drops of lead acetate to 10 %). Positive 
result: color ranging from yellow to purple.
Coumarins
In a test tube was placed 2.0 mL of the ethanolic solu-
tion, capped with filter paper soaked in 10 % solution of 
NaOH and brought to a water bath at 100 ° C for some 
10 minutes. It was removed and the filter paper was 
examined under ultraviolet light. The yellow or green 
fluorescence indicates the presence of coumarins.
Flavonoids
This study is based on the modification of the structure 
of the flavonoid in the presence of acid. Was placed in a 
tube, 2.0 mL ethanolic extract being added two drops of 
10 % lead acetate. The presence of a colored precipitate 
indicates positive aspects of the reaction
Tannins
The 2.0 mL of the ethanol extract was added 10 mL 
of distilled water. They were filtered and were added 
two drops using a Pasteur pipette, the 10 % ferric chlo-
ride solution. blue color indicates possible presence of 
hydrolysable tannins and green staining tannins.
Saponins
In this assay, with 2.0 mL of ethanolic solution, was 
added 5.0 mL of boiling distilled water. After cooling, 
stirred vigorously, leaving at rest for 20 minutes. It is 
classified by the presence of saponins foaming.
Triterpenes
In this assay, with 2.0 mL of ethanolic solution, was 
added 5.0 mL of chloroform. After filtration, the extract 
was divided into two portions. In each tube there were 
the Liebermann-Burchard reactions and Salkowski. The 
triterpenes develop color and stable steroids develop 
color changing with time
 Results and Discussion
Collection and preparation of botanical struc-
tures
After processing, the botanical structures provided 
the following quantities fresh materials and dried mate-
rials, which demonstrated sufficient sample for ongoing 
research (Table 1):
Species of Celastraceae family, highlighting the gender 
Maytenus, has been the subject of numerous phytoche-
mical investigations and many secondary metabolites 
have biological activities. The major classes of metabo-
lites include those described pentacyclic triterpenes and 
friedelânicos quinonamethide, sesquiterpenes, secofrie-
delanos, steroids, agarofurânicos derivatives, glycosides, 
proanthocyanidins, flavonoids glycosides, sesquiterpene 
alkaloids pyridine and catechins (HURTADO, 2013).
Identification of secondary metabolites of 
botanical structures
The secondary metabolites found in the leaves were 
for alkaloids, glycosides cardiotonic using Salkowiski 
reagents, Keller-Killiani, Baljet and Raymond, coumarins, 
flavonoids, tannins, saponins and triterpenes. But results 
were negative for cardiotonic glycosides using reagents 
Kedde and Liebermann-Burchard and triterpenoids using 
the reagent Salkowiski, according to Table 2:
For the secondary metabolites of the stems, the re-
sults were positive for: alkaloids, cardiotonic glycosides 
using Salkowiski reagents, Keller-Killiani, Baljet and 
Raymond, coumarins, flavonoids, tannins, saponins and 
triterpenes. But results were negative for cardiotonic 
glycosides using reagents Kedde and Liebermann-Bur-
chard, according to Table 3:
While for the secondary metabolites of bark, the results 
were positive for: alkaloids, cardiotonic glycosides using 
reagents and Salkowiski Baljet, coumarins, flavonoids, 
condensed tannins and triterpenes. But results were ne-
gative for cardiotonic glycosides using Kedde reagents, 
Keller-Killiani, Liebermann-Burchard and Raymond and 
saponins, according to Table 4:
Based on the results obtained, the qualitative phyto-
chemical analysis indicated the presence of large num-
Plant 
material
Weight 
fresh (g)
Weight dry 
(g)
Extract 
yield (mL)
Leaves 1.122,67 506,15 50
Bark 2.030,44 379,16 75
Stems 909,32 290,75 53
Table 1: Botanical structures collected to yield the 
extract, fresh weight and dry weight
Ciência e Natura v.38 n.3, 2016, p.  1479 – 1486 1482
ber of classes of secondary metabolites present in the 
leaves, stems and bark of M. guianensis. Of secondary 
metabolites analyzed the substances that were found 
present alkaloids, coumarins, flavonoids and tannins 
using all specific reagents. The absence of other com-
pounds may be associated with the degree of ripeness at 
harvest, by genetic differences between cultivars, storage 
conditions, time between harvesting and pulping and 
storage conditions of the pulp, among other factors, as 
expressed Schmidt (2009).
Still According Bobbio; Bobbio (2003), the degradation 
of some compounds may occur during the extraction of 
vegetable, processing and storage of food, influenced 
by extrinsic and intrinsic factors. Temporal and spatial 
variations in total content as well as the relative pro-
portions of secondary metabolites in plants occur at 
different levels (seasonal and daily; intraplanta, inter- 
and intraspecific), and despite the existence of a genetic 
control, the expression may undergo modifications 
resulting from interaction of biochemical, physiological, 
ecological and evolutionary processes. They represent 
a chemical interface between the plant and the sur-
rounding environment, so its synthesis is often affec-
ted by environmental conditions (COUTINHO, 2013). 
The plant extracts containing alkaloids are used as me-
dicines, poisons and magic portions since the dawn of 
civilization. Thus it is difficult to establish the correct 
origin of the discovery of these substances. Records 
indicate that opium was used by the Sumerians 4000 
years BC because of its soporific and analgesic properties 
(HOSTETTMAN et al., 2003).
The isolation of the first pure substances from the plant 
kingdom begins to happen in the nineteenth century. 
This century characterized by extracting work mainly 
organic acids and organic bases which later received 
alkaloids denomination. Are this time the isolation of 
morphine (1804), quinine and strychnine (1820) (AL-
MEIDA et al., 2009).
Currently, numerous experiments show the fact that 
many secondary metabolites present in plants, such as 
terpenes, alkaloids, cyanogenic glycosides, saponins, 
tannins, anthraquinones are allelochemicals represen-
ting adaptive characters and has diversified during 
evolution by natural section to protect plants against 
viruses, bacteria, fungi, plants and competing against 
herbivores (WINK, 2003).
Cardiac glycosides are complex triterpene molecules 
created by amphibians and plants that exert intense biolo-
Secondary metabolites Extract ethanol Colouring/Precipitation
Alkaloids
Reagent the Mayer Positive Orange
Reagent the Wagner Positive Cream
Reagent the Dragendorff Positive Orange
Glycosides cardiotonic
Reagent the Salkowiski Positive Red
Reagent the Kedde Negative Yellow
Reagent the Keller-Killiani Positive Dark green
Reagent the Liebermann 
Burchard
Negative Yellow
Reagent the Baljet Positive Orange
Reagent the Raymond Positive Orange
Coumarins Positive Green fluorescence
Flavonoids Positive Red
Tannins Positive Green
Saponins Positive Foaming
Triterpenes
Reagent the Liebermann-
Buchard 
Positive Brown
Reagent the Salkowski Negative Red
Table 2: Identification results of secondary metabolites of ethanol extract of the leaves of M. guianensis
1483 Lima et al : Approach Phytochemistry of...
gical effects in humans and many other organisms. While 
extremely toxic, these molecules often have therapeutic 
use, when properly administered in minute quantities. 
In humans, small amounts of cardiac glycosides soften 
and strengthen the heart beat. They do this by blocking 
the sodium and potassium pump of heart cells, which 
leads to a delay in the electrical signal between the atria 
and the ventricles. In larger amounts, cardiac glycosi-
des can be extremely toxic, rapidly induce drowsiness, 
color vision disorders, slow and irregular heart rhythm, 
followed by death (SIMÕES et al., 2004).
The coumarin found in all botanical structures M. 
guianensis are a chemical class, the first isolated re-
presentative of Vogel in 1820, the species coumarone 
odorata. These metabolites are present in different 
parts of the plants both in the roots and in the flowers 
and fruits and may be distributed in different families 
of Angiospermae as Apiaceae, Rutaceae, Asteraceae in 
which are found with wide occurrence. Also present 
in Fabaceae, Oleaceae, Moraceae and Thymeleaceae. 
Among the taxa that biosynthesize coumarins have 
species of very diverse habits, such as trees, shrubs and 
herbs (RIBEIRO; KAPLAN, 2002).
The plants rich in alkaloids pyrrolizidine began to be 
studied by chemists of natural products because farmers 
in many parts of the world, began to associate them with 
the intoxication of ruminants and horses, which caused 
serious economic problems (BULL et al., 1968).
Flavonoids also found in all botanical structures M. 
guianensis represent one of the major phenolic groups 
and diverse among the products of natural origin. This 
class of secondary metabolites is widely distributed in 
the plant kingdom (SIMÕES et al., 2004). They are found 
in fruits, vegetables, seeds, bark, roots, stems, flowers 
and their preparation products such as tea and wine 
(NIJVELDT et al., 2001). They have a characteristic core 
C6 -C3 -C6 being biosynthesized from the channels of 
shikimic acid and acetic acid (CAZAROLLI et al., 2002).
Clinical studies have been conducted in various 
parts of the world in order to verify the effectiveness of 
flavonoids in diseases of inflammatory origin, such as 
interstitial lung disease, idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, 
asthma and pulmonary sarcoidosis. In these studies 
highlight the flavonol quercetin. Moreover, efficacy 
studies involving synthetic derivatives are also being 
developed (HOWES et al., 2007).
The pentacyclic triterpenes and friedelânicos quino-
namethide are the most common in plant extracts of M. 
guianensis (HURTADO, 2013). The reported biological 
structures and functions are: pentacyclic triterpenes: 
a skeleton is formed by three carbon atoms may be 
arranged in five six-membered rings (NUÑEZ et al., 
Table 3: Identification results of secondary metabolites of ethanol extract of the stems of M. guianensis
Secondary metabolites Extract ethanol Colouring/Precipitation
Alkaloids
Reagent the Mayer Positive Orange
Reagent the Wagner Positive Purple
Reagent the Dragendorff Positive Orange
Glycosides cardiotonic
Reagent the Salkowiski Positive Red
Reagent the Kedde Negative Orange
Reagent the Keller-Killiani Positive Dark green
Reagent the Liebermann 
Burchard
Negative Yellow
Reagent the Baljet Positive Orange
Reagent the Raymond Positive Orange
Coumarins Positive Green fluorescence
Flavonoids Positive Red 
Tannins Positive Gren  
Saponins Positive Foaming 
Triterpenes
Reagent the Liebermann-
Buchard 
Positive Brown 
Reagent the Salkowski Positive Orange 
Ciência e Natura v.38 n.3, 2016, p.  1479 – 1486 1484
2005). The populnônico acid, isolated from the bark of 
Austroplenchia populnea, has anti-inflammatory acti-
vity. This plant is found in the Brazilian Cerrado and 
used in folk medicine for the treatment of dysentery 
and inflammations such as rheumatism (ANDRADE 
et al., 2007); Sesquiterpenes: Basic skeleton dihydro-β
-agarofurano. This structure comprises rings A and B 
as a decalin, having a melt tetrahydrofuranyl bridge. 
This isolated from Celastrus vulcanicola presents pho-
tosynthetic inhibition activity. The isolated constituents 
of this plant and its biological activity had not yet been 
investigated. C. vulcanicola is a subtropical woody vine 
distributed in Central America and the Caribbean (TOR-
RES-ROMERO et al., 2008); Quinonamethide triterpenes: 
secondary metabolites are restricted to higher plants of 
Celastraceae family (CORSINO et al., 2000). Tingenone 
is a substance isolated from the roots of several species 
of the family Celastraceae, for example, Austroplenckia 
populnea (DUARTE et al., 2006) and Hippocratea excelsa 
(MENA-REJÓN et al., 2007). Has numerous biological 
activities, such as Trypanosoma cruzi (DUARTE et al., 
2006), intestinal Giardia (MENA-REJON et al., 2007) 
and inhibition of tubulin protein that may be the mode 
of action which justifies the cytotoxic and antitumor 
activity (MORITA et al., 2008).
Steroids or triterpenes constitute the essential or 
volatile oils. According Fracaro et al. (2004), there is no 
fundamental difference between the triterpenes and 
sterols, considering the latter as tetracyclic triterpenes 
have lost at least three methyls. These metabolites are 
found in the ethanol extracts of bark and stems of me-
dicinal plants, because their therapeutic interest gives 
to the importance of cardiotonic glycosides, which are 
part of this group. Tannins have proved positive in this 
study, can be used to treat diarrhea, as diuretics in sto-
mach problems (heartburn, gastritis, gastric ulcer, tumor 
stomach and duodenum) and also as anti-inflammatory, 
antiseptic and haemostatic (CUNHA et al., 2010).
The presence of saponins was confirmed in the stu-
dy with only the leaves and bark, as to be busy, the 
plant extract formed foams, indicating a positive result. 
According Yang et al. (2010), the antifungal activity of 
saponins, is due to the interaction of these sterols with 
the plasma membrane
Conclusion
From the experiments, it was found that all botanical 
structures fitoquimicamente tested exhibit secondary 
metabolites (alkaloids, coumarins, flavonoids, tannins 
and triterpenes). However, it is necessary that this species 
Table 4: Identification results of secondary metabolites of ethanol extract of bark of M. guianensis 
Secondary metabolites Extract ethanol Colouring/Precipitation
Alkaloids
Reagent the Mayer Positive Orange 
Reagent the Wagner Positive Purple 
Reagent the Dragendorff Positive Orange 
Glycosides cardiotonic
Reagent the Salkowiski Positive Green 
Reagent the Kedde Negative Orange 
Reagent the Keller-Killiani Negative Yellow
Reagent the Liebermann 
Burchard
Negative Yellow
Reagent the Baljet Positive Orange 
Reagent the Raymond Negative Red 
Coumarins Negative Not Green fluorescence
Flavonoids Positive Orange 
Tannins Positive Green 
Saponins Negative No foaming
Triterpenes
Reagent the Liebermann-
Buchard 
Positive Brown 
Reagent the Salkowski Positive Red 
1485 Lima et al : Approach Phytochemistry of...
is subject to phytochemicals biomonitorados studies, 
in order to isolate and identify the active compounds 
and establish relationship with the biological activities 
observed in popular use.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank the National Council for Scientific 
and Technological Development (CNPq) for financial 
support and the Research Support Foundation of Ama-
zonas State (FAPEAM) for granting the scholarship for 
the first author.
References
ALHO, C.J.R. Importância da biodiversidade para a 
saúde humana: uma perspectiva ecológica. Estudos 
avançados, v.26, n.74, p.156-164, 2012.
ALMEIDA, M.R.; LIMA, J.A.; SANTOS, N.P.; PINTO, 
A.C. Pereirina: o primeiro alcaloide isolado no Brasil? 
Revista Brasileira de Farmacognosia, v.19, n.4, p.54-60, 
2009.
ANDRADE, S.F.; CARDOSO, L.G.V.; CARVALHO, J.C.T.; 
BASTOS, J.K. Anti-inflammatory and antinociceptive 
activities of extract, fractions and populnoic acid from 
bark wood of Austroplenckia populnea. Journal of 
Ethnopharmacology, v.109, p.464-471, 2007.
ANDRADE, J.I.A. Atividade antibacteriana dos extratos 
dos frutos de Coussapoa asperifolia magnifolia (Trécul) 
contra Aeromonas hydrophila e fracionamento do 
extrato metanólico. 2009. Dissertação (Mestrado em 
Biotecnologia) – Universidade Estadual do Amazonas, 
Manaus. 
BOBBIO, F.O.; BOBBIO, P.A. Introdução à Química dos 
Alimentos. 3ed. São Paulo: Varela, 2003.
BORRÁS, M.R.L. Plantas da Amazônia: medicinais ou 
mágicas – Plantas comercializadas no Mercado Municipal 
Adolpho Lisboa. Manaus: Valer, 2003. 322p. 
BULL, L.B.; CULVENOR, C.C.; DICK, A.J. The 
Pyrrolizidine Alkaloids: Their Chemistry, Pathogenicity 
and Other Biological Properties. Amsterdam: North-
Holland, 1968. 
CAZAROLLI, L.H.; ZANATTA, L.; ALBERTON, E.H.; 
FIGUEIREDO, M.S.R.B. Mini-Revisão sobre metabólitos 
secundários. Medicinal Chemical, v.8, n.1, p.1429, 2002.
CORSINO, J.; CARVALHO, P.R.F.; KATO, M.J.; LATORRE, 
L.R.; OLIVEIRA, O.M.M.F.; ARAÚJO, A.R.; BOLZANI, 
V.S.; FRANÇA, S.C.; PEREIRA, A.M.S.; FURLAN, 
M. Biosynthesis of friedelane and quinonemethide 
triterpenoids is compartmentalized in Maytenus 
aquifolium and Salacia campestres. Phytochemistry, 
v.55, p.741-748, 2000.
COUTINHO, M.R. Extração de tanino em folhas, sementes 
e frutos verdes de cinamomo (Melia azedarach L.) 
com diferentes tipos de solventes. 2013. 42f. Trabalho 
de conclusão de curso de graduação: Tecnologia em 
Alimentos da Coordenação dos Cursos de Tecnologia e 
Engenharia de Alimentos, da Universidade Tecnológica 
Federal do Paraná – UTFPR. 42f.
CUNHA, A.P.; SALGUEIRO, L.; ROQUE, O.R. 
Metilxantinas. In: CUNHA, A. P. (Org). Farmacognosia e 
Fitoquímica. 3. ed. Lisboa: Fundação Calouste Gulbenkian, 
2010.
DAS, B. K.; SAHU, S.; PRADHAN, J.; MOHAPATRA, B.C.; 
MISHRA, B.K.; SARANGI, N. Effect of Magnifera indica 
kernel as a feed additive on immunity and resistance to 
Aeromonas hydrophila in Labeo rohita fingerlings. Fish 
& Shellfish Immunology, v.23, p.109-118, 2007.
DUARTE, L.P.; VIEIRA-FILHO, S.A.; SILVA, G.D.F.; 
SOUSA, J.R.; PINTO, A.S. Anti-trypanosomal activity 
of pentacyclic triterpenes isolated from Austroplenckia 
populnea (Celastraceae). Revista do Instituto de Medicina 
Tropical de São Paulo, v.44, n.1, p.109-112, 2006.
DUKE, J.A.; VÁSQUEZ, R. Amazonian ethnobotanical 
dictionary. CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida, USA, 1994. 
114p.
FONSECA, A.P.N.D.; SILVA, G.D.F.; CARVALHO, 
J.J.; SALAZAR, G.D.C.M.; DUARTE, L.P.; SILVA, R.P.; 
TAGLIATI, C.A.; ZANI, C.L.; NEVES, T.M.A.; PERES, V.; 
VIEIRA-FILHO, S.A. (2007). Estudo fitoquímico do decocto 
das folhas de Maytenus truncata Reissek e avaliação 
das atividades antinociceptiva, antiedematogênica e 
antiulcerogênica de extratos do decocto. Química Nova, 
v.30, n.4, p.842-847.
FRACARO, S.N.; DECONTO, I.; NAKASHIMA, T. 
Potencial de toxicidade reprodutiva do extrato de 
Tillandsia usneoides Linnaeus, 1762 (barba-de-pau) 
em coelhas gestantes. Tese (Mestrado em Ciências 
Veterinárias), Universidade Federal do Paraná. Curitiba, 
2004, 60p.
GONÇALVES, A. L.; ALVES-FILHO, A.; MENEZES, 
H. Estudo comparativo da atividade antimicrobiana 
de extratos de algumas árvores nativas. Arquivos do 
Instituto Biológico, v.72, n.3, p.353-358, 2005.
Ciência e Natura v.38 n.3, 2016, p.  1479 – 1486 1486
HOSTETTMAN, K.; QUEIROZ, E.F.; VIEIRA, P.C. 
Princípios ativos de plantas superiores. São Carlos: 
EdUFSCar. 2003. 
HOWES, L.G.; JAMES, M.J.; FLORIN, T.; WALKER, C. 
Expert Opin. Invest. Drugs v.16, n.1, p.1255, 2007.
HURTADO, F.B. Contribuição ao estudo fitoquímico e 
biológico da entrecasca da espécie Maytenus guianensis 
Klotzsch ex Reissek. 2013. 170 f. Doutorado em Biologia 
Experimental. Universidade Federal de Rondônia, Porto 
Velho.
MACARI, P.A.T.; PORTELA, C.N.; POHLIT, A.M. 
Antioxidant, cytotoxic and UVB-absorbing activity of 
Maytenus guianesis Klotzsch (Celastraceae) bark extracts. 
Acta Amazônica, v.36, n.4, p.513-518, 2006.
MATOS, F.J. Introdução à fitoquímica experimental. 
3.ed. Fortaleza: Edições UFC, 2009. 141p.
MENA-REJÓN, G.J.; PÉREZ-ESPADAS, A.R.; MOO-
PUC, R.E.; CEDILLO-RIVERA, R.; BAZZOCCHI, I.L.; 
JIMÉNEZ-DIAZ, I.A.; QUIJANO, L. Antigiardial activity 
of triterpenoids from root bark of Hippocratea excelsa. 
Journal of Natural Products, v.70, p.863-865, 2007.
MICHELIN, D.C.; MORESCHI, P.E.; LIMA, A.C.; 
NASCIMENTO, G.G.F.; PAGANELLI, M.O.; CHAUD, 
M.V. Avaliação da atividade antimicrobiana de extratos 
vegetais. Revista Brasileira de Farmacognosia, v.15, n.4, 
p.316-320, 2005.
MORITA, H.; HIRASAWA, Y.; MUTO, A.; YOSHIDA, 
T.; SEKITAB, S.; SHIROTAB, O. Antimitotic quinoid 
triterpenes from Maytenus chuchuhuasca. Bioorganic 
Medicinal Chemistry Letters, v.18, p.1050-1052, 2008.
NIJVELDT, R.J.; NOOD, E.; HOORN, D.E.C.; BOELENS, 
P.G.; NORREN, K.; LEEUWEN, P.A.M. Flavonoids: a 
review of probable mechanisms of action and potential 
applications. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., v.74, n.1, p.418, 2001. 
NUÑEZ, M.J.; REYES, C.P.; JIMÉNEZ, I.A.; MOUJIR, L.; 
BAZZOCCHI, I.L. Lupane triterpenoids from Maytenus 
species. Journal of Natural Products, v.68, n.7, p.1018-
1021, 2005.
OLIVEIRA, D.M.; SILVA, G.D.F.; DUARTE, L.P.; 
VIEIRA, S.A. Chemical constituents isolated from 
roots of Maytenus acantophylla Reissek, Celastraceae. 
Biochemical Systemy Ecology, v.34, p.661-665, 2006.
REVILLA, J. Apontamentos para a cosmética Amazônica. 
SEBRAE-INPA, Manaus, Amazonas, 2002. 445p.
RIBEIRO, C.V.C.; KAPLAN, M.A.C. Tendências evolutivas 
de famílias produtoras de cumarinas em Angiospermae. 
Química Nova, v.25, n.4, p.533-538, 2002.
SCHIMIDT, D. Palmeira Juçara: exploração ecológica 
dos frutos. Agroecologia e Saúde, 2009.
SIMÕES, C.M.O.; SCHENKEL, E.P.; GOSMANN, 
G.; MELLO, J.C.P.; MENTZ, L.A.; PETROVICK, P.R. 
Farmacognosia: da Planta ao Medicamento, 5.ed. Editora 
da UFSC: Santa Catarina, 2004.
TANAKA, J.C.A.; SILVA, C.C.; FILHO, B.P.D.; 
NAKAMURA, C.V.; CARVALHO, J.E.; FOGLIO, M.A. 
Constituintes químicos de Luehea divaricata Mart. 
(Tiliaceae). Química Nova, v.28, n.5, p.834-837, 2005.
TORRES-ROMERO, D.; KING-DIAZ, B.; JIMÉNEZ, I.A.;. 
LOTINA-HENNSEN, B.; BAZZOCCHI, I.L. Sesquiterpenes 
from Celastrus vulcanicola as photosynthetic inhibitors. 
Journal of Natural Products, v.71, p.1331-1335, 2008.
YANG, C. R. et al. Antifungal activity of C-27 steroidal 
saponins. Antimicrobial agents and chesmotherapy. .50 
(5). p. 1710-1714, 2006.
WINK, M. Evolution of secondary metabolites from 
anecological and molecular phylo genetic perpective. 
Phytichemistry, v.64, n.1, p.3-19, 2003.
ZILBERG, D.; ABUTBUL, S.; GOLAN-GOLDHIRSH, 
A.; BARAZANI, O.  Use of Rosmarinus officinalis 
as a treatment against Streptococcus iniae in tilapia 
(Oreochromis sp.). Aquaculture, v.238, p.97-105, 2004.
