Plant Physiol. (1977) 60, 723-729Involvement of Phaseolotoxin in Halo Blight of BeansTRANSPORT AND CONVERSION TO FUNCTIONAL TOXINReceived for publication May 19, 1977 and in revised form July 30, 1977ROBIN E. M1TCHELL AND RODERICK L. BIELESKIPlant Diseases Division, Department ofScientific and Industrial Research, Private Bag, Auckland, NewZealandABSTRACThmoloxn ([N-h f loritbh ylhoma e)rodced by Psedoma phsoelkola (Boukh.) Dows. ilmiqcultue. When paeolotoxin Wa aplied to laves of bean (Phawolasvulgaris L.) at 0.1 to 1 nmoe/g h weit of leaf by a PCk-assayprocedue, the characeristic "bale" symptom of bean halo bgtdi_eae develped after 24 to 48 hou. At higheconcentration (10-100 nmoeg fesh weight) the systemic symptoms, which are comnonlya feature of dieasd pblts, abo developed after 24 to 48 hour.When applied to be leaves, pheton was rapidly brokendown by the sequentil removal of hoaine ad alaine. N5-P_ospyosuffmylomnithine was the major product formed, altoophosphosu_famate ad unracted phseotoxin wer abo present.When P. phawolkol. infected bea plants, very litlk photoxwa detected witin the plnt, but the mout of N8- ylor-nithine fonmed ws sffkiient to accout for the observed chlorosis, theoenitie acmulation, ad the systemi symptom. N'-h f-mithine therefore seemed to be the maI ft pytoton ofbeas halo Miht disease.When OS-peolotoxin was applied to prmay kaves, 3sS (asmedto be a Of peo xi, N- y hine, andn n te) wa actively loaded into the fine veim of the leafand moved throug the plat in the vasculr system at a spted greaterthan 3 cm/howr, prt toward the apklc and lateral buds and theroot tips. Certain fetors which affect phioem (arsete, cold)affected toxin movement and the expression of systemi symptoms.Autoradogphy sested that the 2.S was tr"orted in the phloem.A model for the involvement of ph ton in hba bht deeip esented.Halo blight disease of beans (Phaseolus vulgaris L.) is causedby a bacterial pathogen, Pseudomonas phaseolicola (Burkh.)Dows. In common with several other plant diseases caused bydifferent species of Pseudomonas (4) this disease is characterizedby the development of a chlorotic zone or halo around thenecrotic infection site. The halo is believed to result from theaction of toxin(s) released from the bacteria in the infection siteand diffusing into the surrounding leaf tissues (18). In severelyinfected plants systemic symptoms occur: young trifoliate leavesbecome yellowed in the interveinal tissue and severe stuntingand distortion of the plants often result (8, 10). When only oneprimary leaf is infected, there is a pattern of systemic symptomsin the trifoliate leaf that is very similar to the distributionpattern of "4C-assimilate from that primary leaf (6, 7). Althoughthis suggests that movement of a chlorosis-inducing factor(s) istaking place through the phloem, it is still not certain whethertoxin(s) itself is moving, or some product of the toxin(s), oreven the infecting organism (9).Until recently, a better understanding of the physiologicalbehavior of bean halo blight toxin has been hindered by thedifficulties encountered in purifying and identifying the toxin(s)and by the limited knowledge of its chemical properties. How-ever, Mitchell (12), working with New Zealand isolates of P.phaseolicola, has successfully purified a toxin and characterizedit as (N8-phosphosulfamyl)ornithylalanylhomoarginine, and hasgiven it the trivial name phaseolotoxin. A minor component,also a toxin and forming about 6% of the crude toxin, has beenidentified as the analogue, [2-serineFphaseolotoxin (13). In aseparate study, Patil et al. (14), working with other isolates ofP. phaseolicola, have reported a toxin complex of at least fourcompounds. One of these has been identified as N-phosphoglu-tamic acid and has been given the trivial name phaseotoxin A.The nature of the other components of the complex is not yetknown, but Patil et al. (14) suggested that they may also be N-phosphoamino acids. The reasons that different toxins havebeen isolated by these two groups of workers is not known, butmay be related to the use of different bacterial isolates anddifferent bioassays.In the present study we have asked whether phaseolotoxin islikely to be an effective agent of bean halo blight disease and ifits behavior in the bean plant can explain the known character-istics of the disease.MATERIALS AND METHODSPrepantion and Storage of Phaseolotoxin. Phaseolotoxin wasisolated from liquid culture of P. phaseolicola PDDCC1 4612(race 2) (a higher yielding isolate than PDDCC 3612 as usedearlier) by the procedure of Mitchell (12) (glucose concentrationof the original medium reduced to 2 g/1 to aid isolation). Thepurity of the phaseolotoxin was checked before use by two-dimensional TLE/TLC and was 80% or more: the major con-taminants were the breakdown products ornithylalanylhomoar-ginine and phosphosulfamate. Because of this instability pha-seolotoxin was stored in frozen solution at -20 C (1.5 mg in300 Al of water) in a 0.3-ml Reactivial (Pierce Chem. Co.). Foraddition to tissue extracts as a nonradioactive carrier, 20 ,ul(100 ,ug) was used when required. 'S-Labeled phaseolotoxinwas prepared from liquid cultures of P. phaseolicola PDDCC3612. In these cultures, sulfate concentration was reduced to0.02 g/l in order to maximize incorporation of the 'S-sulfate(3.8 mCi in 600 ml of medium; 3.2% incorporation, giving 122pCi of phaseolotoxin at 0.20 ACi/Ag). Radiolytic breakdownwas minimized by storing the material as a frozen solution in aReactivial at -20 C.1 Abbreviations: PDDCC: Plant Diseases Division Culture Collec-tion; PSOrn: N8-phosphosulfamylornithine; MCA: methanol-chloro-form-0.25 M aqueous ammonia; TLE: thin layer electrophoresis; t.s.:transverse section.723 www.plantphysiol.orgon May 1, 2019 - Published by Downloaded from Copyright © 1977 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.MITCHELL AND BIELESKIBecause of the method of purification, the phaseolotoxinused can be assumed to be in the form of its diammonium salt,mol wt 566.Preparation of N8-Phosphosulfamylornithine. PSOrn has beenchemically characterized during studies on the structure ofphaseolotoxin (12). For use as a standard and as a carrier, itwas prepared by reacting phaseolotoxin (1 mg) with leucineaminopeptidase (5.3 units in 0.5 ml of 0.25 M NH4HCO3, 40C, 40 hr). The product, which consisted of a mixture ofhomoarginine, alanine, and PSOrn (TLE/TLC), was subjectedto ion exchange chromatography on QAE Sephadex as de-scribed by Mitchell (12). The PSOrn fraction was checked forpurity by TLE/TLC (12), dissolved in 200 ,ul of water, and wasstored frozen in a 0.3-ml Reactivial. As required, 20 ul (about50 uig) was used as a nonradioactive carrier for addition toextracts.Application of Phaseolotoxin to Bean Leaves. Dwarf beanplants (P. vulgaris L. cv. "Seminole"), 7 to 9 days old, weregrown in nutrient solution as described by Mitchell (12). Toxinsolutions were applied to primary leaves of 7-day-old plantseither for bioassay or for experiments on the behavior of 35S-labeled phaseolotoxin. When translocation experiments werebeing carried out, the standard application site was in green leaftissue in the angle between the midrib and the main lateralvein, 5 to 7 mm from the leaf base. A droplet of the testsolution (2 ,ul) was put on the upper surface of the leaf, whichwas then pricked once by a needle through the droplet (20).The droplet dried in about 20 min, and then each prick markwas rewetted with 2 IAI of water. A further 2 IA1 of water wasadded 20 min later. The diameter of the chlorotic zone wasmeasured after 48 to 72 hr. A mild systemic response wasrecorded if there was some interveinal chlorosis in one of theouter leaflets of the first trifoliate leaf, but little effect on leafgrowth. A severe systemic response was recorded when therewas a marked chlorosis in at least one outer and half of thecentral leaflet, and a marked reduction in tissue expansion inthose areas.Preparation and Infection of 35S-labeled Bean Plants. 35-Labeled bean plants were prepared to determine whether plantsinfected with P. phaseolicola PDDCC 3612 or PDDCC 4612contained phaseolotoxin and PSOrn. Young bean seedlings (6days old; primary leaves just starting to unfold) were transferredto 35S-labeled medium (nutrient culture medium with S042-concentration reduced from 2.7 mM to 63 uM and made to 1mCi/l with 35SO42-). After 2 to 3 days, each plant was inoculatedby spraying with a Vilbiss atomizer the undersurface of oneprimary leaf with a suspension of P. phaseolicola (about 106cells/ml) until small areas of water-soaking just started to occur.In the first experiment PDDCC 3612 was used, and beforespraying, the undersurface of the leaf was lightly scratched toaid infection. In the second experiment PDDCC 4612 wasused, and care was taken not to damage the leaf surface. Theplants were kept for 24 hr in a humidity cabinet, then transferredto the glasshouse (20-25 C), and after a further 4 or 6 days (atabout 2 weeks old), were harvested for extraction.Tissue Extraction. Tissue (typically 1 g fresh wt) was weighedand, if appropriate, rinsed in distilled H20 to remove surfacephaseolotoxin that had not been taken up from the applicationsite. It was then blotted dry, cut with scissors into small pieces,and homogenized in a Duall grinder with 12 ml of MCA (3:1:1,v/v) containing 20 ,lA of nonradioactive phaseolotoxin or PSOrn,when required, as a carrier for radioactive products. The result-ing homogenate was filtered and the filter cake was washedwith MCA (2 x 5 ml). The combined filtrate and washingswere evaporated to dryness on a rotary evaporator (bath temp40 C), then shaken with 1 ml of water and 8 ml of chloroform.The aqueous phase was separated and the chloroform phasewas washed with 1 ml of water. The aqueous phase, combinedwith washing, was evaporated to dryness and either purified byion exchange chromatography on QAE Sephadex (12) or ex-amined by two-dimensional TLE/TLC. TLE was at pH 2 (3)for 15 min; but because both cations (phaseolotoxin) and anions(PSOrn, phosphosulfamate, sulfamate) were to be studied, theorigin was placed 6 cm from the cathode end of the plate. TLCwas in 1-butanol-acetic acid-water-pyridine (5:1:4:4, v/v). Plateswere autoradiographed, sprayed with ninhydrin, and cut up formeasurement of radioactivity (16). Ornithine in toxin-treatedtissue was identified and its amount estimated by TLE/TLC (3).Pattern of Movement of Toxin. We applied 6 ,ug (1.1 ,ICi)of 35S-phaseolotoxin to the standard site of a primary leaf, thenafter 6 or 24 hr the plants were mounted on Miracloth, driedrapidly between two pieces of Miracloth in a photographicglazing press, and autoradiographed. The locus of toxin move-ment in the plant was studied by taking small segments of thepetiole and stem from plants 24 hr after applying the toxin,freezing them in liquid N2, and sectioning at 10 ,um in acryostat. The sections were laid directly onto x-ray film, driedfor 20 sec in a warm air stream, and then autoradiographed for12 weeks. The film was moistened with steam after exposurebut prior to development in order to fix the sections to the filmsurface.Speed of Toxin Transport. We applied 10 ,ug of phaseolotoxinto one primary leaf (at the standard site) on each of 32 plants.After various time intervals, the treated leaf was cut at the baseof the petiole from two to six of the plants. The plants werethen left until 48 hr after treatment and scored for the occur-rence of systemic symptoms in the young trifoliate leaves.Effect of Arsenate on Toxin Transport. A 2-,Il drop of either20 mm arsenate or 20 mm phosphate was first applied to thestandard site of a primary leaf by pricking with a needle. After10 min, 2 ,ul of phaseolotoxin solution (5 j,g/jul) was added tothe site. Then after a further 10 min, an additional 2 ,ul ofarsenate or phosphate solution was added. Each treated leafwas cut (at the base of its petiole) from the plant 6.5 hr afterapplying phaseolotoxin. The plants were then left for a further42 hr and scored for occurrence of systemic symptoms in theyoung trifoliate leaves.Effect of a Petiolar Cold Jacket on Toxin Transport. Threeplants were equipped with petiolar cold jackets. A plasticscintillation vial was slit vertically from its mouth to halfwaydown. Two small holes were cut in opposite sides of the vial ateach end of the slit. It was then possible to fit the petiole of aprimary leaf across the middle of the vial and to seal it in placewith Silastic 9161 RTV quick curing rubber. Melting crushedice was put into the vial so that a 2.5-cm segment of the petiolebecame chilled to 0 C. Water was removed by suction and freshice was added as required. Once chilling had started, 2 p.l of5S-phaseolotoxin (1 ,uCi, 6 ,ug) was injected at the standardsite. After 7 hr, the jacket was removed. Two of the plantswere prepared for autoradiography, and one was cut intosegments for extraction with 2% formic acid (100 C, 10 min) inorder that radioactivities could be measured. The autoradi-ographed plants were later cut up and extracted for measure-ment of their radioactivity. Three control plants (without coldjackets) were treated concurrently.Measurement of Radioactivity. Radioactivity was measuredin a Packard scintillation spectrometer, and quench correctionwas by the channels ratio method. Each sample (piece of TLClayer or portion of extract) was made to 1 ml with water, then 9ml of Triton-X scintillant was added (15, 16).RESULTSOrnithine Accumulation in Response to Phaseolotoxin.Leaves of healthy bean plants grown by our procedure contained<3 gig ornithine/g fresh wt. Chlorotic areas from plants infected724 Plant Physiol. Vol. 60, 1977 www.plantphysiol.orgon May 1, 2019 - Published by Downloaded from Copyright © 1977 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.Plant Physiol. Vol. 60, 1977 FUNCTIONAL TOXIN OF BEAN HALO BLIGHT 725with P. phaseolicola PDDCC 3612 contained 1 to 1.5 mg ofornithine/g fresh wt. Chlorotic regions caused by applying eithercrude culture medium (P. phaseolicola PDDCC 3612) or puri-fied phaseolotoxin (10 ng) both contained 0.5 to 0.75 mg ofornithine/g fresh wt. The values for infected tissues and forchlorotic areas produced by crude toxin agree with those ofother workers (17).Dose Response of Bean Leaves to Phaseolotoxin and PSOrn.In general, application of less than 4 ng of phaseolotoxin gave . _no chlorosis, and amounts greater than 500 ng caused a wide-spread chlorosis in the injected leaf and systemic symptoms inthe developing trifoliate leaves. In the range 5 to 100 ng, a welldefined circular or oval chlorotic zone formed around theapplication site; the mean diameter was a linear function of thelogarithm of the dose applied (Fig. 1). Typically, 10 ng gave a1-cm2 spot, corresponding (on the basis of 17.5 mg fresh wt/cm2 of leaf and mol wt 566) to an average toxin concentrationin the chlorotic zone of 1 nmol/g fresh wt. The lowest effectivedose, 4 ng, gave a 0.3-cm2 spot and an average concentration of1.3 nmol/g fresh wt. PSOrn gave a dose response curve identicalto that of phaseolotoxin (Fig. 1).General Pattern of Toxin Movement. Autoradiographsshowed that much of the 3S-phaseolotoxin (85-90% by subse-quent measurement of radioactivity) had stayed within 2 to 3mm of the application site. The remainder showed a moregeneral and widespread movement (outer zone) (Fig. 2). Theshape of the chlorotic spot coincided well with that of the outerzone of the radioactive patch, although traces of radioactivitywere found beyond the outer boundaries of the chlorotic area.A test of the application procedure (using 3S-phosphosulfamatein place of 35S-phaseolotoxin to conserve material) showed that24 hr after injection, 75% of the material could be removed bya 15-sec rinse of the leaf surface. Thus, we believe that over75% of the toxin had failed to enter the leaf, but that once ithad entered, it was able to move away from the applicationsite. From specific activity data and from the radioactivity in 10cmthe outer zone we estimate that chlorosis was being obtainedwith loadings as low as 0.3 to 0.4 ng/cm2, corresponding toconcentrations of 0.03 to 0.04 nmol/g fresh wt.Doses of phaseolotoxin in excess of 500 ng applied to thestandard site caused systemic chlorosis. Systemic symptoms20-EE1100.FIG. 2. Autoradiograph of bean plant supplied with 6 Ag (1.1 ,uCi)of 35S-phaseolotoxin at standard site and harvested 24 hr later. Notefixation of much `sS at application site, 6 cm from margin of leaf inangle between midrib and main lateral vein. Note also accumulation oftoxin in veins, uneven concentration in trifoliate leaf, and relative lack1.0 2.0 in second primary leaf.Dose, log,,(ng per spot)FIG. 1. Relationship between diameter of chlorotic spot and dose of developed at about the same rate as symptoms in the treatedphaseolotoxin (plotted on a logl0 scale). Toxin was applied to primary primary leaf; they were just detectable after 24 hr, and fullyleaves of bean plants, and after 48 hr the long and short axes of each developed after 48 hr. Generally, the young trifoliate leaf waschlorotic spot were measured, then averaged to give diameter; * unevenly affected: the central leaflet was half green and halfphaseolotoxin; A: PSOrn. Line of best fit for phaseolotoxin data is y = chlorotic with the midrib forming the dividing line, while each13.Ox - 4.1; and for PSOrn data isy = 12.7x - 4.3. outer leaflet resembled the adjacent part of the central leaflet. www.plantphysiol.orgon May 1, 2019 - Published by Downloaded from Copyright © 1977 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.MITCHELL AND BIELESKIThere was a corresponding unevenness in the distribution of5S-phaseolotoxin (Fig. 2). 35S became concentrated in thechlorotic half of the trifoliate leaf, but none entered the secondprimary leaf in which systemic chlorosis was never observed. 35Salso showed a tendency to become concentrated in other meris-tematic areas: in the apical bud, the lateral buds, and the roottips (Fig. 2). The autoradiographs showed that the speed oftoxin movement was greater than 3 cm/hr. In the injected leaf,there was a marked accumulation of 35S in the minor veinsystem; the pattern in the stem also suggested that toxin wasmoving through the vascular system.We therefore studied the 35S distribution in transverse andlongitudinal sections of the petiole and stem. In the petiole, thegreatest concentration was in the phloem of the vascular bun-dles, but there was also some present in the xylem (Fig. 3).There was virtually no activity in the central parenchyma, but asmall amount was present in the parenchyma outside the bundlesand in the epidermis. Seen in t.s., the vascular bundles formeda horseshoe, the two at the ends having the highest activity. Inthe stem above the petiole there was a more general distributionof activity. The highest activity was again in the phloem (forminga ring around the stem as viewed in t.s.), with two zones ofgreater activity about 1200 apart. There was also a considerableamount of activity in the xylem and the epidermis with ratherless in the cortical parenchyma and much less in the pith. In thestem below the petiole, however, most of the 35S was confinedto the phloem. There was virtually none in the xylem, corticalparenchyma, or pith, although some was located in the epider-mis. Activity was 1.5 to 2 times as great on one side of the stemas on the other.Chemical Fate of Phaseolotoxin Injected into Leaves. Prelim-inary results suggested that there was a rapid loss of phaseolo-toxin in leaves, and so the fate of 5S-phaseolotoxin was studiedafter periods of 0.5 to 24 hr from the time of application (TableI). Most breakdown of phaseolotoxin seemed to occurwithin the 1st hr and to result in the loss of 60 to 90% ofthe original phaseolotoxin. After short times (1-2 hr), (N8-phosphosulfamyl)ornithylalanine was an important product, butafter longer times (6-24 hr) PSOrn was the major product.Very little free sulfate was formed during the 1st day (Table I).When 35S-labeled compounds in the systemically affected trifol-iate leaf were examined 6 to 24 hr after supplying 35S-phaseolo-Table I. Distribution of 35S in various compounds isolated at various times afterapplication of 35S-phaseolotoxin to primary leaves of bean plants.Radioactivity is expressed as a percentage of the total extracted. InExperiment 1, samples were taken after 0.75 and 1.5 hr; in Experiment 2, sameleswere taken after 6 and 24 hr. Total 35S (nCi) recovered in Expt. 1 was 372.9(0.75 hr), 491.3 (1.5 hr); and in Expt. 2 was 45.3 (6 hr primary), 9.67 (6 hrtrifoliate), 44.3 (24 hr primary) and 12.02 (24 hr trifoliate).Experiment 1 Experiment 2Compound 0.75 hr 1.5 hr 6 hr 6 hr 24 hr 24 hrprimary primary primary trifoliate primary trifoliate% total 35S total 35Sphaseolotoxin 30.7 10.9 18.3 33.5 23.9 25.2(N-phosphosulphamyl)- 26.6 24.4 ND1 ND ND NDornithylalaninePSOrn 28.5 50.8 64.7 36.8 37.5 36.0phosphosulphamate 10.1 9.8 16.3 29.7 13.5 28.1sulphamate 4.0 4.0 0.7 ND 25.1 10.7sulphate ND ND ND ND ND ND1ND: not determined (less than 0.5% of total)toxin, the pattern was much the same as in the treated primaryleaf (Table I); that is, phaseolotoxin, PSOrn, phosphosulfamateand sulfamate were all present, with the first two compoundscontaining about 50 to 60% of the total radioactivity. Thus,there is an apparent anomaly in that phaseolotoxin is veryrapidly hydrolyzed during its initial uptake yet can subsequentlysurvive transport during several hr through the length of theplant. Our interpretation is that the hydrolysis of phaseolotoxinoccurs prior to its uptake into the cell, and that once inside thecell, phaseolotoxin is reasonably stable.Toxin Content of Infected Bean Plants. In an initial experi-ment using only phaseolotoxin carrier with 35S-labeled plantsinfected by P. phaseolicola PDDCC 3612, the radioactivityrecovered in the phaseolotoxin (<103 cpm) was no greater withinfected plants than with healthy plants. In two subsequentexperiments, phaseolotoxin and PSOrn were used together ascarriers. In the first, the 6-day-old infected primary leaf, thepetiole and upper parts of two plants (1.95 g fresh wt) weretaken for extraction and a control sample (1.95 g fresh wt) wastaken from uninfected plants. In the second experiment, 4-day-old infected and chlorotic primary leaves of three plants weretaken in one sample (1.28 g fresh wt), and the uninfectedprimary leaves from two of the same plants formed a controlFIG. 3. Diagram of distribution of 35S in transverse sections of bean plant. Primary leaf was supplied with 6 jLg (1.1 ,LCi) of phaseolotoxin atstandard site; after 7 hr, sections were cut on a cryostat and were autoradiographed for 15 weeks. Left: petiole of treated primary leaf; center:stem below treated leaf; right: stem above treated leaf. Bar represents 0.25 mm. e: epidermis; p: primary phloem; c: cambium and secondaryphloem; x: xylem; g: ground parenchyma.LOWER STEMc p eI I IC p eB.I~LI_____________________~~~I_ ___.__________726 Plan.t Physiol. Vol. 60, 1977PETIOLE UPPER STEM www.plantphysiol.orgon May 1, 2019 - Published by Downloaded from Copyright © 1977 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.FUNCTIONAL TOXIN OF BEAN HALO BLIGHTsample (1.16 g fresh wt). In both experiments, the carrierphaseolotoxin which was recovered contained very little 35S,whereas carrier PSOm contained considerable amounts of 35Swhen reisolated from infected tissue (but not from controltissue). Readily detectable amounts of 36S-phosphosulfamic acidand 35S-sulfamic acid were also found in the infected tissues(Table II). It was possible to calculate the minimum amount ofPSOrn present in the infected tissues from its radioactivity andfrom the known specific radioactivity of 3S-sulfate supplied tothe original plants. In the first experiment there were 5.3 nmolof PSOrn (2.7 nmol/g fresh wt) and in the second 1.9 nmol ofPSOrn/primary leaf (4.5 nmol/g fresh wt).Rate of Toxin Movement in Systemic Response. When pha-seolotoxin was applied to the primary leaf at the standard site,systemic symptoms were usually obtained when the leaf re-mained attached to the plant for at least 7 hr afterward, butwere prevented if the leaf was removed within 3 hr (Fig. 4).Thus, the speed of movement of an effective dose is of theorder of 7 cm (from application site to the stem) in 7 hr, or 1cm/hr.Effect of Arenate on Toxin Transport. Application of 40nmol of arsenate to the leaf along with the phaseolotoxinreduced the rate of toxin movement. When the injected primaryleaves were removed 6.5 hr after injection from five plantstreated with toxin plus arsenate, no systemic symptoms wereobtained in any of the five plants. In contrast, when five controlplants were similarly treated with toxin plus phosphate, fourout of five developed strong systemic symptoms, and onedeveloped weak systemic symptoms.Effect of Petiolar Chillin on Toxin Transport. When thepetiole was chilled to 0 C, movement of 35S-toxin from the leafto the body of the plant was greatly reduced. Autoradiographsof control plants showed that in 7 hr, 35S had reached all partsof the plant, and had become more concentrated in the trifoliateleaflets than in the main part of the injected leaf (cf. Fig. 2). Inplants with cold jackets, there was virtually no detectableradioactivity in the main body of the plant and none in thetrifoliate leaves; instead there was a wider spread of activity inthe injected leaf. When radioactivities in the various parts ofthe plants were measured, it was found that the cold jacket hadreduced movement of 35S from the injected leaf to less than 5%of the movement of 35S from the control leaf (Table III).DISCUSSIONNature of the Dose Response Curve. The parameters used inplotting the dose response curve (spot diameter versus log[dose]) gave a linear relationship for reasons unknown. Hoitinket al. (10) measured a dose response curve (as spot area versuslog [dose]) for culture filtrates of P. phaseolicola and noted thata shallow curve was obtained. When our data were plotted onTable II. Distribution of 35S in various compounds isolated from healthy beanleaves or bean leaves infected with P. phaseolicola when plants had previouslygrown in 35S-sulphate.In Experiment 1 upper parts from plants infected with PDDCC 3612 and acorresponding control sample from uninfected plants were harvested 6 days afterinfection. In Experiment 2, primary leaves infected with PDDCC 4612 and uninfectedprimary leaves (as a control) were harvested 4 days after infection.Experiment 1 Experiment 2CaopoundControl Infected Control InfectednCi/g fresh wt nCi/g fresh wtphaseolotoxin 0.25 0.65 ND1 0.34PSOrn 0.17 32.73 0.16 54.50phosphosulphamate 0.09 7.55 ND 9.60sulphamate 1.63 1.99 0.82 2.171ND: not determined (less than 0.07 nCi/g fresh wt)7274B~* :.~: * :3 @0o 2 000' *1 5 9 13 25Period (hr) before removal of leoafFIG. 4. Nature of systemic symptoms, as function of time of removalof treated leaf, in bean plants that had received 10 g&g of phaseolotoxinat standard site at time 0, and that were scored for symptoms 48 hrafter treatment of primary leaf. Each symbol denotes one plant, scoredas follows: 0: no visible symptoms; 1: barely visible chlorosis in somepart of trifoliate leaf; 2: weak chlorosis in half an outer leaflet oftrifoliate leaf; 3: well defined chlorosis in all of an outer leaflet; 4:marked chlorosis of an outer leaflet and half of middle leaflet, withgrowth inhibition and distortion of trifoliate leaf.Table III. Distribution of S in various parts of bean plants treated with 5S-phaseolotoxin.Plants were treated with S-phaseolotoxin at the standard site, with orwithout (control) a cold jacket (0 C) fitted to the petiole of the treated leaf.Plants were harvested 7 hr after treatment with phaseolotoxin.Plant Part Control Cold jacketdpm S dpm STreated primary leaf 456420 98.57 455500 99.89Half-petiole of treated leafnext to blade 646 0.14 226 0.05Half-petiole of treated leafnext to stem 238 0.05 25 0.01Untreated primary leaf 309 0.07 66 0.01Lower stem 905 0.20 112 0.02Roots (including hypocotyl) 3099 0.67 35 0.01Upper stem 727 0.16 17 0.00Trifoliate leaf 704 0.15 22 0.00Total meved past mid-petiole oftreated leaf 5973 1.29 277 0.06the same ordinates as used by Hoitink et al. (10), we obtained acurve of identical shape (Fig. 5) despite the many differences ofexperimental procedure. The striking similarity of the two setsof data is indirect evidence that phaseolotoxin was the activeagent present in the crude extracts of Hoitink et al. (10). It alsosupports their view that the departure of the relationship (spotarea versus log [dose]) from linearity is a real one.Minimum Effective Dose. In the original assay procedure(12), phaseolotoxin-containing solution was sprayed onto theundersurface of primary bean leaves and entered the intercellu-lar space system through the stomates. From the estimatedvolume of liquid entering the leaf (10-20 1ul in 5 cm2) and fromthe minimum phaseolotoxin concentration required to producechlorosis (1 ,ug/ml), we estimate that the minimum effectivedose with this assay was 3 ng/cm2 (0.3 nmol/g fresh wt). In thepresent study, the stab procedure of Woolley et al. (20) wasused, and the minimum dose was calculated as 1.2 nmol/g freshwt. However, over 75% of the applied phaseolotoxin apparentlyfailed to enter the leaf, and so the true value was probablycloser to 0.3 nmol/g fresh wt, as observed with the spray assay.In the outermost regions of the chlorotic zone, the concentrationwas about 0.03 nmol/g fresh wt, which can be taken as theminimum effective dose of phaseolotoxin in bean leaves.The partial breakdown of phaseolotoxin to PSOrn whenPlant Physiol. Vol. 60, 1977 www.plantphysiol.orgon May 1, 2019 - Published by Downloaded from Copyright © 1977 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.MITCHELL AND BIELESKIEE2000100-0 0.3 0.6 0.9 1.2Relative dose (logio)FIG. 5. Relationship between area of chloroticphaseolotoxin (plotted on a loglo scale). This isdose response used by Hoitink et al. (10). Plottedseparate experiment from that shown in Fig. 1)is the quadratic of best fit calculated by Hoitinketdose response curve determined with crude culturephaseolicola (see text). A relative dose of 10 (i.e. log10etal. (10) corresponds to a dose of 18 ng of phaseolotoxin/assayour experiments. When our data from this figureFigure 1, the data fit a straight line (y = 11.5applied to bean leaves means that the dose responsefor phaseolotoxin must in fact be the dose responseof phaseolotoxin and PSOrn. There seems to beof measuring the toxicity of phaseolotoxin in itssuggest that it is probably similar to the toxicityToxin Dose in Systemicafly Affected Leaves.toxin transported into the systemically affectedaccount for the observed chlorosis? A comparisonograph densities (e.g. Fig. 2) showed that the concentrationtoxin in the trifoliate leaf was similar to that in thethe chlorotic zone in the treated leaf. This is confirmeddata such as those of Table III: in 7 hr of transportsufficient to give the systemic response, see Fig.toxin had entered the trifoliate leaf of the controlwas 3 cm2 (65 mg), giving a concentration of 0.2wt. This is similar to the dose required for chlorosisapplication site in the primary leaf. Thus, wechlorosis in the systemically affected leaf is causedported toxin.Omithine Acculmlation. Ornithine derived fromtoxin is not sufficient to account for ornithinechlorotic zone. A dose of 10 ng of phaseolotoxinng ornithine but brings about the accumulationForm of Toxin in Diseasd Plants. Althoughwas formed in culture by P. phaseolicola PDDCCcaused chlorosis when applied to bean leaves, phaseolotoxinnot established as the functional toxin in the diseasedthe present study, less than 0.02 nmol of phaseolotoxin/gwt was recovered from diseased tissues of beanwith P. phaseolicola PDDCC 3612 -an amountminimum effective dose. We therefore searchedrelated to phaseolotoxin. Phosphosulfamate andpresent, but do not appear to function as toxins (12). Incontrast, PSOrn, the major product detected, shows the sametoxicity as phaseolotoxin during bioassay (Fig. 1). Like phaseo-lotoxin, it has a chemical structure in which an analogue ofcarbamyl phosphate (>SO2 replacing >CO) is attached toomithine (11), 'potentially accounting for the known effect ofbean halo blight toxin on ornithine accumulation (17) andornithine transcarbamylase activity (14). The amount of PSOrncontained in the diseased tissue was 3 to 4 nmol/g fresh wt orabout 1,500 ng/primary leaf. Had this amount been applied tothe leaf by one of the assay procedures, it would have causedgeneral chlorosis and the development of severe systemic symp-toms. Thus, the amount of PSOm generated within infectedplants was sufficient to account for both leaf chlorosis andsystemic symptoms. In contrast, uninfected primary leaves ofthe same plants which were not chlorotic also contained noPSOm.This result prompted investigation of the chemical fate of35S-phaseolotoxin in bean plants. Although there was a rapidbreakdown of much of the phaseolotoxin, the data suggestedthat once phaseolotoxin entered the cell and transport system,it was no longer broken down (Table I). The data also indicatedthat the reaction course was:phaseolotoxin (N8-phosphosulfamyl)ornithylalanine -* PSOrnphosphosulfamate -* sulfamateas a result of the successive hydrolytic cleavage of homoarginine,alanine, ornithine, and inorganic phosphate from the35S-con-taining portion (see ref. 12). Removal of homoarginine andalanine was rapid while loss of omithine was much slower, sothat between hr 4 and 24, PSOrn was the main compoundpresent. This behavior of phaseolotoxin in the plant is in markedcontrast to its behavior in vitro, where breakdown depends onthe marked instability of the N-P and P}-O-S bonds (12):phaseolotoxin -. tripeptide + phosphosulfamateandphosphosulfamate -- inorganic phosphate + sulfamateThus, the in vivo breakdown of phaseolotoxin is parallel to thebreakdown observed when phaseolotoxin is sequentially hydro-lyzed by carboxypeptidase (12), yieldingPSOm which is thenstable to the enzyme. In contrast, phaseolotoxin is resistant tophosphatase. Both wheat germ acid phosphatase or a highactivity plant alkaline phosphatase (2) gave no measurablehydrolysis under conditions giving almost complete hydrolysisof ATP and glucose-6-P (Mitchell, unpublished data). Bothtypes of enzyme were present in a crude enzyme extract frombean leaf, and when phaseolotoxin was added to the extract,PSOm was produced. However, with a dialysate from theenzyme extract, or with a boiled enzyme extract, PSOrn wasnot produced from the added phaseolotoxin (Mitchell andBieleski, unpublished data). We suggest that when the leaf isdamaged during the assay procedure, peptidase is released intothe extracellular space; peptidase-catalyzed hydrolysis of therelatively stable peptide bonds dominates a slower chemicalhydrolysis of the P-N bond, andPSOm is formed as the majorproduct, and functional toxin.In the host, does P. phaseolicola producePSOrn instead ofphaseolotoxin, or is phaseolotoxin produced and then modifiedby the host? Although a mere trace of phaseolotoxin wasrecovered from infected bean leaves, we believe that phaseolo-toxin was still the main product, and that PSOrn arose second-arily through the action of peptidase released from leaf cellsdamaged by infection. This view is supported by our failure tofind detectable amounts of PSOm in culture solutions used assources of phaseolotoxin.728 Plant Physiol. Vol. 60, 1977 www.plantphysiol.orgon May 1, 2019 - Published by Downloaded from Copyright © 1977 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.FUNCTIONAL TOXIN OF BEAN HALO BLIGHTSystemic Movement of Toxin. Several observations suggestthat toxin (phaseolotoxin and/or PSOrn) was actively trans-ported by way of the phloem. If 35S-phaseolotoxin had movedpassively by diffusion and mass flow within the leaf, it wouldhave become concentrated around the margins of the treatedleaf. Instead, there was a marked accumulation within thevascular system (see Fig. 2), much like that observed wheninorganic phosphate is supplied in the same way (ref. 1; Bieleski,unpublished data). Apparently, therefore, vein loading of toxinoccurred. Toxin movement out of the treated leaf was againstthe flow of transpirational water, and took place at a speedgreater than 3 cm/hr. Such movement is incompatible withsimple diffusion or cytoplasmic streaming alone. Three resultspoint to the phloem as the pathway. First, arsenate, a knowninhibitor of vein loading and phloem transport, inhibited thesystemic movement. Second, autoradiographs of petiole andstem sections showed that mS-toxin was located mainly in thephloem (Fig. 3). Third, chilling a short length of petiole to 0 Creduced systemic movement of toxin to about 5% of the rateobserved at 24 C. This compares closely with the resultsreported by Geiger (5), who noted that by chilling bean leafpetioles to 3 C, translocation of 14C-photosynthate from thetreated leaves was reduced to 5% of the value obtained at 20C. As has been observed in another similar study (19), the coldjacket in our experiments caused no loss of leaf turgor during a7-hr treatment under low humidity conditions, implying thatthe chilling had not caused any major inhibition of xylemmovement.Two other features are worthy of comment. First, differencesin 35S distribution patterns seen in autoradiographs of transversesections of petiole, upper stem, and lower stem indicate thatthere is a rather ready loss of toxin from the phloem intosurrounding tissues, including the xylem, as toxin moves throughit. A very similar pattern, also showing redistribution into thexylem, was observed by Biddulph (1) when studying phloemtransport of phosphate and sulfate in bean. On this basis,downward movement of toxin in the petiole and lower stemmay be exclusively through the phloem while part of the upwardmovement in the upper stem may occur in the transpirationstream in the xylem, as the result of subsequent transfer oftoxin from phloem to xylem. There is some evidence that toxinmay finally accumulate in photosynthetic and meristematictissues. The marked accumulation in the root tips suggests thatinhibition of root growth may be another, but unrecognized,symptom of bean halo blight disease. Second, the occurrence ofphaseolotoxin and PSOrn in the systemically affected leaf showsthat phaseolotoxin, and presumably PSOrn as well, is capableof being moved by the phloem transport process.We can therefore infer that in the diseased plant as well,toxin generated by the bacteria will also be able to movethrough the plant by phloem transport, and in amounts sufficientto cause chlorosis in the recipient leaves. We suggest that thesystemic symptoms of halo blight in beans do not depend onsystemic movement of bacteria, even if this phenomenon doesoccur (9).Condusion. The data presented allow us to describe, in amore detailed way than has been possible until now, the placeof a bacterial product in the etiology of bean halo blight disease.In our view, P. phaseolicola bacteria infecting the plant releasephaseolotoxin into the extracellular space of the leaf. Peptidasespresent in the cell wall or plasmalemma, or else released fromcells damaged by the infection, convert phaseolotoxin to PSOrn.PSOrn, which is the main functional toxin, diffuses away fromthe infection site and is taken up (probably by an active process)into the still living cells causing ornithine accumulation and Chlbreakdown, and so forming the characteristic halo around theinfection site. Some of the PSOrn is actively loaded into theleaf veins and is transported by way of the phloem particularlyto sites of active cell division and cell expansion, there causingornithine accumulation, chlorosis, and inhibition of growth andleading to the appearance of the systemic symptoms.Acknowkdgment -We thank E. A. Parsons for her excellent technical assistance.LITERATURE CffED1. BIDDULPH SF 1956 Visual indications of S: and Pa translocation in the phloem. Am J Bot43: 143-1482. BIaLIa, RL 1974 Development of an externally-located alkaline phosphatase as aresponse to phosphorus deficiency. In RL Bieleski, AR Ferguson, MM Cressell, eds,Mechanisms of Regulation of Plant Growth Bulletin 12. Royal Soc of NZ, Wellington,pp 165-1703. BiazaaKi RL, NA TURNER 1966 Separation and estimation of amino acids in crude plantextracts by thin-layer electrophoresis and chromatography. Anal Biochem 17: 278-2934. GARER ED, SH ScHasE'R 1963 Genetic and biochemical characteristics of six phyto-pathogenic species of Pseudomonas. Bot Gaz 124: 324-3285. GuoGER DR 1969 Chilling and translocation inhibition. Ohio J Sci 69: 356-3666. HAE CN 1970 Studies on halo blight of bean. Physiological aspects of the disease inPhascolus vudgaris L. PhD thesis. University of Wales Bangor7. HALE CN, R WNnAD 1973 The translocation of 14C-labelled assimilates by dwarf beanplants infected with Pseudomonas phaseolicola (Burk) Dows. Ann Bot 37: 473-4808. HALE CN, R WHrsrtmD, B IANsssaN, C. MASNHAL 1972 Growth responses of dwarf beanto infection by Pseudomonas phaseolicola (Burk) Dows. Ann Bot 36: 135-1439. HIwDnReND DC, MN SCHROTH 1971 Isolation of Pseudomonas phaseolicola from beanleaves exhibiting systemic symptoms. Phytopathology 61: 580-58110. HomNK HAJ, RL PELLErIeE, JG COULSON 1966 Toxemia of halo blight of beans.Phytopathology 56: 1062-106511. MrrCHELL RE 1976 Bean halo-blight toxin. Nature 260: 75-7612. MrrcHELL RE 1976 Isolation and structure of a chlorosis-inducing toxin of Pseudomonasphaseolicola. Phytochemistry 15: 1941-194713. MrrcHELL RE, EA PASoNS 1977 A naturally occurring analogue of phaseolotoxin (beanhalo blight toxin). Phytochemistry 16: 28014. PATIL SS, P YOUNGBLOOD, P CHANSEN, RE MooRE 1976 Phaseotoxin A: anantimetabolite from Pseudomonas phascolicola. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 69:1019-102715. PATTERSON MS, RC GlENE 1965 Measurement of low energy beta-emitters in aqueoussolution of lquid scintillation counting of emulsions. Anal Chem 37: 854-85716. REDGWELL RJ, NA TusNER, RL BIaLSsKI 1974 Stripping thin layers from chromatographicplates for radiotracer measurements. J Chromatogr 88: 25-3117. RUDOLPH K, MA STAHMANN 1966 The accumulation of L-ornithine in halo blight infectedbean plants (Phaseolus vulgaris L.) induced by the toxin of the pathogen Pseudomonasphaseolicola (Burkh.). Phytopathol Z 57: 29-4618. WAfrz L, W. ScHwARTz 1956 Untersuchungen fiber die von Pseudomonas phaseolicola(Burkh.) hervorgerufene Fettfleckenkrankheit der Bohne. II. Untersuchungen zur Path-ogenese. Phytopathol Z 26: 297-31219. WEBs JA, PR GoRHtA 1965 The effect of node temperature on assimilation andtranslocation of C14 in the squash. Can J Bot 43: 1009-102020. WooLLEY DW, RB PRINGLE, AC BRAUN 1952 Isolation of the phytopathogenic toxin ofPseudomonas tbaci, an antagonist of methionine. J Biol Chem 197: 409-417729Plant Physiol. Vol. 60, 1977 www.plantphysiol.orgon May 1, 2019 - Published by Downloaded from Copyright © 1977 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.