ASSUMPTION 
COLLEGE 
THE EIGHTY-THIRD COMMENCEMENT 
SATURDAY, THE TWENTIETH DAY OF MAY, 
IN THE YEAR OF OUR LORD, TWO THOUSAND 
I 
Order of Exercises 
Academic Procession 
Presiding 
Charles L. Flynn, Jr., Ph.D., Provost 
Invocation 
Reverend Dennis M. Gallagher, A. A., Acting Vice President for Religious Affairs 
National Anthem 
Senior Members of the Assumption College Chorale 
Greetings 
Charles L. Flynn, Jr., Ph.D., Provost 
Very Reverend John L. Franck, A.A., Chairman of Board of Truste es 
FJonorable Raymond V. Mariano, Mayor, City of Worcester 
Thomas R. Plough, Ph.D., President 
Presentation of St. Augustine Award 
Charles L. Flynn, Jr., Ph.D., Provost 
Valedictory Address 
Laura B. R aymond 
Introduction of Commen cement Speaker 
Deirdra A. Sauter, Salutatorian 
Commencement Address 
Kenneth S. Apfel, Commissioner of Social S ecurity 
Presentation of Candidates for Degr ees 
Honoris Causa 
Timothy M. Barnicle, Member of Board of Trust ees 
Degrees in Course 
Graduate Degrees 
Mary Lou Anderson, Ed.D., Dean of the Colleg e 
Continuing and Professional Education Degre es 
Charlene L. Martin, Dean of Contin uing Education 
Bachelor of Arts 
Mary Lou Anderson, Ed.D., Dean of the College 
Alma Mater 
Assumption College Chorale and the Symphonic Brass Quartet 
Michelle Graveline, D M.A., Director 
Remarks and Benediction 
Most Reverend Daniel P. Re illy, D.D., S.T.D., Bishop of Worcester 
Recessional 
Reception 
Tent Behind Plourde Recreation Center 
Undergraduates Receiving Academic Honors 
Ronelle Meunier 
Laura B. Ra ymond 
Elizabeth M. Palinkas 
Kristen A. Espie 
Geoffrey A. Homoliski 
Kelly M. Before 
Lauren E. Kane 
Laura L. Small 
Abbey L. Dick 
Eileen M. Cusack 
Alessandra Roffo 
Deirdra A. Sauter 
Juraj Danko 
Michael J. DiMarzio 
Laura L. Small 
Kelly S. Panos 
Kristen L. Bud 
Andrew E. Giese 
Kathryn L. Black 
Kathleen F. Roo s 
Katerina S. Callahan 
Stacy A. Mattioli 
Lisa M. Payne 
Erin L. Tobin 
Aimee J. Costanza 
Robert J. Courtney 
Edward J. Buscema 
Art 
Accounting 
Management 
International Business 
Economics 
Global Studies 
Elementary Education 
Secondary Education 
English 
Communications: Media Track 
Foreign Languages 
Spanish 
German 
History 1 
Mathematics 
Computer Science 
Biology 
Biology with Biotechnology Concentration 
Chemistry I 
Philosophy 
Political Science 
Psychology 
Social and Rehabilitation Services 
Social and Rehabilitation Services 
Sociology 
Sociology 
Theology 
The following graduates of the Center for Continuing and Professional Education are members of the 
Assumption College Chapter of Alpha Sigma Lambda, the national honor society for adult students: 
Denise F. Batc helder 
Irene A. Brank 
Maxine R. Casey 
Norma A. Chanis 
Maria A. Choinski 
Richard K. Duguay 
Susan C. Dussault 
Michelle T. Fontaine 
Susan E. Graham 
Laurie J. Harrington 
Jane L. Johnson 
Janet T. Judice 
Lee Ann A. Majercik 
Judy A. Mouradian 
Mark S. Mushinsky 
Sandra J. Ordway 
Nancy A. Peterson 
Denise M. Phaneuf 
Craig S. Prouty 
Jane A. Provost 
Gerard G. Sutton 
Bachelor of Business Administration 
Bachelor of Business Administration 
Bachelor of Science in Liberal Studies 
Bachelor of Science in Liberal Studies 
Bachelor of Science in Liberal Studies 
Bachelor of Science in Liberal Studies 
Bachelor of Science in Liberal Studies 
Bachelor of Business Administration 
Associate of Lib eral Studies 
Bachelor of Liberal Studies 
Bachelor of Science in Libe ral Studies 
Bachelor of Science in Liberal Studies 
Bachelor of Science in Liberal Studies 
Associate of Lib eral Studies 
Bachelor of Liberal Studies 
Bachelor of Science in Liberal Studies 
Bachelor of Science in Liberal Studies 
Bachelor of Science in Liberal Studies 
Bachelor of Science in Liberal Studies 
Bachelor of Liberal Studies 
Bachelor of Business Administration 
Kenneth S. Apfel 
Doctor o f Laws 
Kenneth S. Apfel was nominated in May 1997 by President Clinton, and subsequently confirmed by 
the U.S. Senate, as Commissioner of the United States Social Security Administration (SSA). Mr. Apfel 
has the honor of becoming the first confirmed Commissioner of Social Security since it became an 
independent agency. This new Cabinet level position was authorized by Congress in 1995. 
As Commissioner, Mr. Apfel brings a lifetime of leadership and public service experience to a position 
that has been frequently described as one of the most complex and challenging in the federal government. 
He heads an agency that delivers benefits each month to more than fifty million people. He is responsible 
for the actions of approximately 65,000 employees who, among other responsibilities, serve the needs of 
twenty-six million visitors each year to SSA's 1,300 field offices, and who answer sixty million phone calls 
annually on the agency's toll-free telephone lines. During his tenure as Commissioner, he has significantly 
strengthened the policy, planning, and public education activities at the Social Security Administration. 
He has also played a leadership role in the efforts to strengthen childhood disability programs, and to 
enable persons with disabilities to return to work. In a ddition, he served from 1997-1999 as a member of 
the President's Management Council. 
Prior to his current appointment, Mr. Apfel was the Associate Director for Human Resources at the 
Office of Management and Budget (OMB) in the Executive Office of the President, where he served from 
1995-1997. His responsibilities included budget, policy, and management review of all the human resource 
agencies of the federal government, including SSA, the Departments of Labor and Education, and parts of 
the Departments of Agriculture and Health and Human Services. In this capacity, he was centrally involved 
in efforts to reform welfare and to strengthen federal education and training programs. 
Before his position at OMB, Mr. Apfel served as Assistant Secretary for Management and Budget at 
the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). He was nominated by President Clinton in 
March 1993, and was confirmed by the U.S. Senate. In this capacity, he served as the senior budget official 
and chief financial officer for HHS. He formulated and executed the third largest budget in the world—a 
$700 billion budget for a department staffed nationwide by 125,000 people, with half of HHS resources in 
support of the Social Security Administration. During his tenure, he served as a principal on the Secretary's 
task force that elevated the Social Security Administration to independent-agency status. He also served as 
a member of the President's working group on welfare reform, and the Secretary's task force on Head Start's 
quality improvement. 
Prior to joining the Clinton Administration, Mr. Apfel worked the prior two decades in the area of 
social policy. From 1989-1993, he served as legislative director to Senator Bill Bradley, overseeing the 
formulation and development of all aspects of congressional policymaking. During 1982-1989, he was the 
Senator's chief staff person for federal social policy, with particular focus on programs under the jurisdiction 
of t he Senate Finance Committee. He served as the Senator's key staff person for the Committee's actions 
on the historic 1983 Social Security reform legislation. 
Between 1980-1982, Mr. Apfel was committee staff for human services, education, training, and income 
security programs for the U.S. Senate Budget Committee. From 1978-1980, he served a Presidential 
Management Internship at the U.S. Department of Labor. He was a college administrator from 1973-1976 
at Newbury College in Massachusetts, coordinating a grant from the Department of Health, Education and 
Welfare to provide outreach and remediation to veterans. 
Mr. Apfel was born in Worcester, MA. He graduated from Shrewsbury High School in 1966,- and 
received his bachelor's degree from the University of Massachusetts, Amherst in 1970, a Master's degree in 
Rehabilitation Counseling from Northeastern University in 1973,- and a Master's degree in Public Affairs 
from the LBJ School of Public Affairs at the University of Texas in 1978. He has been elected as a Fellow by 
both the National Academy of Public Administration and the National Academy of Social Insurance. 
He is married to Catherine Hadley, and has two sons, Derek and Dana. 
Graduating Class of 2000 
Graduate School 
MASTER OF BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION 
Paul Anderson 
Dessislava K. Andreeva 
Laura Ann Auger 
Christopher M. Barbour 
Jennifer A. Buffone 
Vanda Sim Conley 
Carolyn R. Dyson 
Francis J. Ciccone 
Mark R Dell 
Jannie Durr 
Jon D. Hogue 
Natalya Fater 
Vicky Fontaine 
Jonathan Richard Gonynor 
Jeffrey D. Harris 
Lloyd Peter Haskell 
Gregory L. Hippert 
Jodi Ann Hogan 
Dorothy H. Jacques 
Mary M. Kavanagh 
Raymond P. K nox 
William Francis Landers III 
Michael S. Lewis 
Elizabeth A. Moquin 
James Edward Noonan 
MASTER OF ARTS 
COUNSELING PSYCHOLOGY 
Shawn Emerson Kenyon 
Devon Klein 
Beth L. McCloskey 
Nicole McGrath 
Alicia A. Mclnnis 
Jane A. Nault 
Christine J. Pappas 
Shirley M. Piskadlo 
Shari M. Oliver 
John D. Robillard 
Stuart Ronald Sheinhait 
Donald Joseph Shimkus 
Suzanne D. Smiley-Sacco 
Marc S. Smith 
Suzanne Wetherbee 
Scott Michael Smith 
Danielle M. Taylor 
Sheila Ann Turner 
Ara Asadoorian 
Jamie Barbieri 
MASTER OF ARTS 
EDUCATION 
James R. Conry 
Christine Clare Conway 
Debra A Frank 
Steven Michael Lamarche 
John J. McHugh 
Carol M. Medico 
Debora Zablocki 
Judith Anne Beaulieu 
Katrina Breen 
Alina Reyes Brush 
MASTER OF ARTS 
SPECIAL E DUCATION 
Loralyn M. Christian 
Kristen M. Douillard 
Mary 1. Fo ley 
Donna Cheryl Watkins Kingman 
Lisa M. Maramo 
Jennifer L. Wood 
Katherine Zywien-Follett 
MASTER OF ARTS 8T CERTIFICATE OF ADVANCED GRADUATE STUDIES 
REHABILITATION COUNSELING 
Monica L. Albert 
Heidi Lyn Bowen 
Maribeth A. Capparelli 
Kristen Daigle 
Christine E. Donovan 
Alison J. McCabe 
Michelle Kristine Micari 
Andrea M. Minichiello 
Amy F. Montecalvo 
Shaye Lynne Paradis 
Brian E. Potter 
Theresa E. Salonis 
Daniel G. Smachetti 
Michelle E. Amado 
Vicki L. Amgott 
Barbara-Ann Borden 
Debra A. Borst 
Kerri Bullock 
Kathleen A. Carey 
Rosemary Catherine Carmody 
Robert R. Caron 
MASTER OF ARTS 
REHABILITATION COUNSELING 
Mary Perry Carpenter 
Bridget Colleen Dessaint 
Laurie Ruth DiOrio 
Widmark Donis 
Eileen Habacker 
Catherine M. Hill 
Patricia M. laniere 
Irene Miller Lombardo 
Julie S. Longacre 
Darren T. Losek 
Julie Gaul Lucier 
Tamara A. Martone 
William H. Moore 
Barbara A. Mulligan 
Joseph F. M urphy, Jr. 
Derek S. Nalle 
MASTER OF ARTS 
RELIGIOUS EDUCATION 
Joan M Burke Elizabeth J. Gilman Michael N. Lavallee 
Sarah Elizabeth O'Connell 
Sharon M. Orefice 
Kellie A. Pearson 
Fan Lucy Pope 
Leisha J. Seifert 
Tina A. Serpa 
Maura Ann Silvia 
Steven James Spar 
Sarah L Travassos 
Patricia L. Verderese 
MASTER OF ARTS 
THEOLOGY 
Linda M. Bixby 
Center For Continuing and Professional Education 
ASSOCIATE OF BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION 
Edmund Arriaga, Accounting, Cum Laude 
Patricia A. Izbicki, Management, Cum Laude 
Darlene M. Waska, Accounting 
ASSOCIATE OF LIBERAL STUDIES 
Diane M. Corazzini, Cum Laude 
Jacqueline F. D oherty, Magna Cum Laude 
Robert C. Fitzgerald 
Susan E. Graham, Magna Cum Laude 
Pamela B. Houlihan, Magna Cum Laude 
Cheryl Elizabeth Kavanagh, Magna Cum Laude 
Joyce Mary McKenna, Magna Cum Laude 
Judy Ann Mouradian, Summa Cum Laude 
Deborah Lynn Neal, Summa Cum Laude 
Alesia Kathleen Padula, Cum Laude 
Suzanne Marie Provencal, Summa Cum Laude 
Anthony Raffaele 
Robin L. Smith 
Paul L. Weisblatt, Summa Cum Laude 
BACHELOR OF BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION 
(b) Denise F. B atchelder, Accounting, Summa Cum Laude 
Kim Marie Beauchamp, Accounting, Magna Cum Laude 
Irene A. Brank, Accounting, Summa Cum Laude 
Kathryn Anne Buckman, Accounting, Cum Laude 
Michelle T. Fontaine, Management, Magna Cum Laude 
Susan M. Girard, Management 
Edward S. Lenard, Management, Cum Laude 
Nancy Malloy, Accounting, Cum Laude 
Kellie A. Malo, Management, Cum Laude 
Kathryn A. Murphy, Management, Cum Laude 
Sharon L. Richford, Management, Cum Laude 
Donna Mae Ripley, Management, Magna Cum Laude 
Joseph P. Schlichte, Management 
Laurel M. Schmick, Management, Magna Cum Laude 
James R. Soares, Management 
Gerard George Sutton, Management 
Ralph T. Vescera, Management 
BACHELOR OF LIBERAL STUDIES 
(a) Laurie J. Harrington, Summa Cum Laude Jane Angela Provost, Summa Cum Laude 
Pamela A. Harris Kelly Ann Schraven 
Brenda J. King, Magna Cum Laude Amy M. Tryba, Cum Laude 
Mark S. Mushinsky 
BACHELOR OF SCIENCE IN LIBERAL STUDIES 
Kathleen E. Barry, Cum Laude 
Gordon L. Beane, Magna Cum Laude 
Maxine Reiter Casey, Summa Cum Laude 
Norma A. Chanis, Summa Cum Laude 
Maria A. Choinski, Summa Cum Laude 
Wendy Jean Davis 
Brien M, Devaney 
Patricia A. DiBonaventura, Cum Laude 
Richard K. Duguay, Summa Cum Laude 
Susan Catherine Dussault, Summa Cum Laude 
Frances Evelyn Ferioli, Magna Cum Laude 
Yolanda Ines Field 
Jane Louise Johnson, Summa Cum Laude 
Janet T. Judice, Summa Cum Laude 
Mary E. Kasik 
Patricia Kempskie, Magna Cum Laude 
Tracey Anne Kennedy 
Geralyn Callahan Kohler, Magna Cum Laude 
Joseph G. Lavin, Cum Laude 
John Joseph Leahy, Cum Laude 
Jonathan D. Lieske 
Lee Ann A. Majercik, Summa Cum Laude 
(b) Sandra Jean Ordway, Summa Cum Laude 
Nancy M. Osborn, Magna Cum Laude 
Nancy A. Peterson, Summa Cum Laude 
Denise Marie Phaneuf, Summa Cum Laude 
Craig S. Prouty 
Suzanne Constance Roy, Cum Laude 
Dorothy M. Stone 
(a) Saint Augustine Award 
(b) Outstanding Service Award 
Undergraduate College 
Bachelor of Arts 
Lisa Conceicao Afonso, Psychology/Spanish 
Diane Celeste Alagno, Biology 
Sophia Andreou, English 
Erin Leigh Angus, Marketing 
Claudia Arcuri, Communications 
Andrew Frederick Arnott, Communications 
Michelle Lynne Babigian, Spanish, E lementary Education 
Sherri Ann Balassone, Communications 
John Paul Barata, Environmental Sc ience 
Christina Louise Barbosa, Biology 
Kimberly Ann Baron, English, Magna Cum L aude 
Bronwen Elizabeth Barrett, Social and Re habilitation 
Services 
Tracy Sue Bartlett, Biology, Cum Laude 
Ty Robert Batten, Biology, Magna Cum L aude 
Joseph Arthur Beauchaine, Political Science 
Kelly Marie Before, Global Studies/Political Sc ience, 
Magna Cum Laude 
Sarah Lynne Begley, Social and Re habilitation Services, 
Cum Laude (e), (f) 
Kristine Denise Belliveau, Psychology, Magna Cum Laude 
Paul A. Belsito, Communications 
Michael James Bierfeldt, Global Studies 
Kathryn Laura Black, Chemistry, Cum Laude 
Katherine Gile Blake, Marketing 
Robert Anthony Boncore, Political Science 
Edita Botonjic, Chemistry 
Anne Marie Bouchard, Social and Reha bilitation 
Services/English 
Eric Charles Boudreau, Sociology 
Courtney Lynn Boulli, Social and Re habilitation Services 
Casey Elizabeth Bowen, English 
Brooke Joan Brady, Spanish 
Michael Richard Braney, Communications, Cum Laude 
Toni Lynn Brehio, Spanish, Secondary Education, 
Cum Laude 
W. Douglas Brown, Jr., Marketing, Cum Laude 
Kelly Elizabeth Bucko, Accounting 
Kristen Lee Bud, Biology, Magna Cum L aude 
Edward J. Buscema, Theology/Mathematics, 
Summa Cum Laude 
Amy Leigh Bushnell, Communications 
Michael Anthony Caira, Jr., English, Elementary Education 
Jacqueline C. Caisse, Social and Rehabilitation Services/ 
Political Science (f) 
Kristin Meredith Calarese, Communications 
Jason Robert Calla, Management 
(d), (e) Katerina S. Callahan, Political Science, Summa Cum Laude 
Michelle Christine Callahan, Management, Cum Laude 
Brandt McLean Calver, Communications 
Michael David Cardillo, Management 
Nancy Eleanor Chapman, Social and Reha bilitation 
Services, Magna Cum Laude 
Ottmar J. Chavez, Global Studies with Business Concentration 
Timothy R. Christian, Marketing, Cum Laude 
Julianne Cialdea, International Business, Cum Laude 
Maura Kathleen Clancy, English, Magna Cum Laude 
Melissa Erin Clark, Marketing 
Jenna Katherine Cloutier, English 
Maureen Grace Collins, English/Political Sc ience, 
Magna Cum Laude 
Kerry A. Conlon, Social and Rehabilitation Services 
Brendon Clement Connors, Communications 
Karen Marie Contursi, Psychology 
Scott Francis Cooley, Marketing 
Tara Kristen Cooper, Marketing /Communications, 
Summa Cum Laude 
Angela Marie Corby, English/Studio Art, Cum Laude 
Christiane Elisabeth Cormerais, Accounting 
Kevin John Cosgrove, History 
Aimee Jeanne Costanza, Sociology, Summa Cum Laude 
Deanna Lee Cotes, Communications/English, 
Magna Cum Laude 
Patrick Michael Coty, Marketing 
Robert Joseph Courtney, Sociology, Summa Cum Laude 
Allison Mary Coutts, History 
Michelle E. Couture, Social and Reh abilitation Services 
Abigail Andre Curto, English, Secondary Education 
Eileen Marie Cusack, English/Communications, 
Magna Cum Laude 
Melissa Ann Cusack, Accounting 
Heather Michelle Daley, Spanish, Elementary Education, 
Cum Laude 
Shawna Lynn DAmour, English /Communications, 
Elementary Education, Cum Laude 
Julie Lucia DAngelo, Economics with Business 
Concentration 
Juraj Danko, International Business/German 
Elizabeth Annette DeBari, Social and R ehabilitation 
Services 
Craig Steven DeCosta, Philosophy 
Michael Demetri, Management 
Gregg Matthew Dennis, Management 
Allison Therese Desmarais, Marketing 
Ryan J. DesRoches, Computer Science 
Christine Nicole Destefano, Communications, 
Magna Cum Laude 
Kerri Lynn Desto, Psychology, Cum Laude 
Stacy Ann Devaney, English/Communications 
Abbey Lee Dick, English, Summa Cum Laude 
Brian Patrick Diercksen, Communications 
Joshua Basque Diggins, History/Psychology, 
Magna Cum Laude 
Michael P. D illon, Theology 
Michael James DiMarzio, History, Magna Cum Laude 
Lauren Marie DiPace, Marketing 
Jodi Dawn DiProfio, Anthropology 
Lisa Ann Donofrio, Psychology 
Colleen Marie Doyle, Psychology 
Sheila M. Driscoll, English 
Heather Lynn Duclos, English 
Amanda Louise Helen Dusza, Spanish, Secondary 
Education 
(f) Jamie Carole Eaton, English/Communications, Cum Laude 
Natali Gabriella Elia, Psychology, Secondary Education, 
Magna Cum Laude 
Sean Richard Ellbeg, Biology 
Richard Francis Elrick, Communications 
Valentina Maria Errico, English/Economic Theory 
Kristen Ann Espie, International Business, 
Magna Cum Laude 
Kristen Ann Exter, Social and Rehabilita tion Services 
Suzanne Marie Farrell, Psychology, Magna Cum Laude 
Marisa Federico, Sociology 
Kathleen Elizabeth Feehily, Psychology 
Kevin Joseph Fenlon, Psychology, Cum Laude 
David Keith Ferrari, Accounting, Magna Cum Laude 
* Christine Lynne Fitzgerald, Communications 
Melissa Marie Fleming, Spanish, Summa Cum Laude 
Christine Leigh Frank, Communications 
Erinn Marie Gallagher, Social and Rehabilitatio n Services 
Stacy Leah Gallagher, Psychology, Cum Laude 
Kathryn Gabrielle Garibaldi, Communications 
Steven Matthew Gaudet, Mathematics, Secondary 
Education 
Christie Lynn Gaulin, Mathematics, Secondary Education 
Renee E. Geneau, Psychology, Cum Laude 
* Jennifer Lynn Gibson, Communications 
Andrew Edward Giese, Chemistry/Biology with 
Concentration in Biotechnology, Cum Laude 
Jessica Lynn Giulino, English 
Doreen Elizabeth Gode, Social and Rehabilita tion 
Services 
Lisa Marie Gomes, Marketing, Magna Cum Laude 
Jennifer Lynn Gorman, Psychology 
Kathryn Mary Gorman, Chemistry, Cum Laude 
Jason Norman Graf, Communications 
Anthony F. G ribbons, Political Scie nce 
Jennifer Lee Griffin, Biology, Cum Laude 
Marianna N. Grillo, Psychology, Adagna Cum Laude 
James Joseph Grocki, Jr., Management 
Matthew J. Grybowski, Mathematics 
Adria Jayne Guimond, Biology with Concentration in 
Biotechnology 
Jacqueline Paulette Hafner, Social and Rehabilitatio n 
Services 
Joshua Patrick Hammer, Biology 
Jennifer Ann Hanley, English 
Meghan Lynn Hansbury, Accounting, Cum Laude 
Neil Daniel Haskell, Sociology 
Sean Michael Hayes, Management/Economic Issues 
and Policy 
Jessica Leigh Hebert, Social and Rehabilita tion Services 
Rachele Laura Henriquez, Communications 
Michael Joseph Herard, Communications 
Sonya J. Hickey, Management 
Paula Jane Higgins, Sociology, Magna Cum Laude 
(c), (e), (f) Geoffrey Alexander Homoliski, Economics with Busine ss 
Concentration, Summa Cum Laude 
Daniel Patrick Huben, Psychology 
Kristen Marie Hurley, English 
Gina Marie lannarilli, English 
Jacqueline Ingemi, English 
Barbara Mildred Jacobs, Social and Rehabilitatio n 
Services 
Brian Richard Jacobs, Marketing 
Lauren Elizabeth Kane, History, Elementary Education, 
Magna Cum Laude 
Joseph Michael Kean, English/Communications 
Kristen Alysse Kelley, Spanish 
Jonathan Michael Kelly, History, Secondary Education 
John Francis Kennedy, Communications, Cum Laude 
Melissa Ann Kenny, English, Elementary Education 
Kathryn Marie Kerr, Psychology, Cum Laude 
Stephanie Jean Kewley, Social and Rehabilitatio n Services, 
Cum Laude 
Alicia Ann Kilcourse, Communications 
Brandon Scott Killion, Management 
Holly Beth Kinch, Social and Rehabilitation Se rvices 
Brendan Michael Klaes, Management 
Jennifer Dawn Koback, Psychology, Cum Laude 
(f) Cory Ann Koehler, Economic Theory, Magna Cum Laude 
Amy Jean Korczynski, Marketing/Communications 
Jason Arthur LaCroix, Communications 
Kristen Ann I^adebauche, Political Science 
Thao Ngoan Lam, Economics with Business Concentration 
Carrie Ann I^andry, Social and Rehabilitatio n Services, 
Magna Cum Laude 
Julie Katherine J.ane, Management 
Keith Michael Laprade, Marketing, Cum Laude 
Federico L.ascano, International Economics 
Jennifer Arline Laurin, English, Secondary Education, 
Cum Laude 
Bryan Richard Laut, History/Management 
Sandra Marie Leardi, Social and Rehabilitation Servic es/ 
English 
Mark Christopher LeBlanc, Marketing 
Melissa Lee, Communications 
Nancy Patricia Lee, Psychology 
Maria Elizabeth LePain, English, Elementary Education 
Patricia Ann LePain, English, Magna Cum Laude 
Jeffrey Michael Levis, Management, Magna Cum Laude 
Nathan Michael Lucier, Management 
Kevin Michael Luperchio, English, Magna Cum Laude 
Jenny Rebecca Lynch, English/Political Science 
Christopher David Madsen, Political Science 
Matthew Manuel Marques, Biology 
Michael John Marshall, Marketing 
Michelle Susan Martin, Psychology 
Stephanie Jane Martin, Management 
(f) Stacy Ann Mattioli, Psychology, Summa Cum Laude 
Bethany Lynn Mawdsley, History, Elementary Education, 
Cum Laude 
Adam Peter Mazzadra, Social and Rehabilitation Se rvices 
Erin Louise McDonough, Psychology 
Dawn Ann McGillivray, Communications 
Daniel Thomas McGowan, History, Secondary 
Education, Cum Laude 
Jennifer Michelle McNulty, Economic Theory 
Brian James Meade, Marketing 
David Albert Mercier, Accounting, Cum Laude 
Ronelle Josephine Meunier, Art History, 
Summa Cum Laude 
Heather Lynn Michel, Psychology 
Kerri Ann Miller, Social and Re habilitation Services 
Jeffrey Milligan, Economics with Business Concentration 
Anne Kathryn Mingolelli, Social and Rehabilitation 
Services 
Heather Leah Mish, Biology 
Jenifer Lynn Monahan, Classics 
Megan Ellen Monahan, English, Secondary Education, 
Cum Laude 
Megan-Sioux Diane Moody, Management 
Bryan Christopher Moore, International B usiness/ 
International Economics 
Andrea Leigh Morgan, Sociology 
Christopher Robert Morris, Management 
Lisa Marie Morrison, Social and Rehabilitation Services 
Jennifer Elizabeth Morrissey, Spanish, Cum Laude 
Suzanne Mumford, Communications 
Kevin Patrick Murphy, History 
Meghan Eileen Murphy, Sociology, Cum Laude 
Meghann Leah Murphy, Accounting 
Melissa Jean Murphy, Biology 
Emily Proctor Murray, English, Cum Laude 
James Michael Murray, History, Cum Laude 
Christopher John Nicoletti, English 
Andrew Wieslaw Niedzwiecki, Mathematics, Secondary 
Education 
Michael David O'Coin, Biology with Concentration in 
Biotechnology/History, Magna Cum Laude 
Todd George O'Connor, Marketing 
Brendan M. O'Donnell, Marketing 
Brian O'Donnell, Accounting, Cum Laude 
Louis W. Olwana, Psychology/International Business 
Erin Marie O'Neil, English, Elementary Education 
John Louis Orlandella, Marketing 
Lisa Sharon Ostberg, Chemistry, Cum Laude 
Elizabeth Marie Palinkas, Management, Magna Cum Laude 
Jennifer Marie Palumbo, Biology 
Kelly Susan Panos, Computer Science/Spanish, 
Magna Cum Laude 
Nicole Paterek, Economic Issues and Pol icy, Cum Laude 
Joanna Therese Patrone, Social and Reh abilitation Services 
(f) Lisa Marie Payne, Social and Rehabilitation Services, 
Magna Cum Laude 
Robyn Lee Pellerin, Psychology, Magna Cum Laude 
Bethany Kate Perry, English, Elementary Education 
Amy Elizabeth Peterson, Political Science, 
Magna Cum Laude 
Dennis Michael Phillips, Jr., Computer Science 
Julie Elizabeth Phipps, English, Magna Cum Laude 
Karen Marie Pincince, English, Magna Cum La ude 
Nicholas Allen Pirrotta, Accounting 
Gina Marie Plourde, English, Elementary Education, 
Cum Laude 
Nicholas Paul Police, Communications 
David Joseph Pollicelli, Jr., Management 
Karen Ann Potty, Social and Rehabilitation Services, 
Cum Laude 
Jeffrey Robert Poulin, Political Sci ence 
Henry A. Pozzuoli, History 
Reneejan Provencher, Accounting 
John Edmund Prybyla, History/Political Science 
Lisa Marie Quinn, Marketing 
Elizabeth Ann Randazzo, Psychology 
Ryan Sean Raposa, Management 
(f) l^aura Beth Raymond, Accounting, Summa Cum Laude 
Laura Sandra Reardon, Marketing/Communications, 
Cum Laude 
Julie Lynn Rebelowski, Social and Reha bilitation Services, 
Magna Cum Laude 
Erin Megan Reczek, Economic Theory/Psychology, 
Cum Laude 
Laurie Aline Remillard, Computer Science 
Jennifer Lynne Remington, Accounting, 
Summa Cum Laude 
Amanda Rhodes, History 
Paul Rizkalla, Psychology 
Jacalyn Marie Robida, Social and Reh abilitation Services, 
Magna Cum Laude 
Vincent Robert Robustelli, Biology 
Anthony Carl Rodrigues, Biology, Magna Cum Laude 
Angel Luis Rodriguez, Social and Rehabilitation Services 
Luis Angel Rodriguez, Social and Re habilitation Services 
(f) Alessandra Roffo, International Business/Foreign Languages, 
Magna Cum Laude 
Nicole Marie Rogalski, Biology, Magna Cum L aude 
David Allen Rollinson, French 
Karly Jean Ronan, Psychology, Cum Laude 
Kathleen Frances Roos, Philosophy, Magna Cum Laude 
Trevor Aaron Rose, Marketing 
Nichole Marie Ruggles, English, Elementary Education 
Teraisa M. Sabatini, Communications 
Brenda Kaye Safford, Social and R ehabilitation Services 
Gregory Vincent Samos, Mathematics 
Laura Ann Sanderson, Spanish, Elementary Education, 
Magna Cum Laude 
Ryan Santimaw, Accounting 
Andrea Carol Saudade, Social and Reh abilitation Services, 
Summa Cum Laude 
(d) Deirdra Anne Sauter, Spanish, Summa Cum Laude 
Brian Kenneth Schlitzer, Psychology 
Gregory Thomas Schultz, English 
John Louis Scott, Global Studies/Geography 
Meghan Lynn Scull, Social and R ehabilitation Services 
Michael David Seabury, Communications 
Mark Arnold Sgalia, English 
Suzanne Louise Shaw, English/Communications 
* Stephen J. Siddle, English 
Marcel Mumbere Sikalavi, International Ec onomics 
Adrienne Burch Silva, Marketing 
Michael Anthony Silvia, Biology 
Christopher Gerard Sixt, Management 
J^ura Lorraine Small, Mathematics, Secondary Education 
Summa Cum Laude 
Kimberly Anne Smith, Accounting, Magna Cum Laude 
* Vanessa Jean Smith, Psychology 
Sarah Marie Sogigian, English 
Beth A. Souchuns, Communications 
Lisa F. Sousa, Economics with Busine ss Concentration 
" Erik Patrick Sparfven, English 
Lauren Anne Staffieri, History, Elementary Education, 
Magna Cum Laude 
Joseph Edward Stafford, Management 
Gregory Patrick Stevens, Management 
Sarah Joanna Steverman, Spanish, Secondary Education 
Kerri Lynne Streeter, Spanish, Elementary Education, 
Magna Cum Laude 
James M. Sullivan, Accounting 
Kenneth Allen Sundberg, Jr., Mathematics 
Gregory John Susko, Economic Issues and Policy 
Amy Lynn Sweet, Communications 
Marianne Tacito, Communications, Cum Laud e 
Erin Elisabeth Tahaney, Social and Rehabilit ation Services 
Michael Jon Taverna, Management 
Meredith Grace Tebbetts, Mathematics, Secondary 
Education, Magna Cum Laude 
Christine Marie Terris, Social and Rehabilitation Serv ices/ 
Psychology, Cum Laude 
Steven Albert Thebodo, Accounting 
Derek Thieme, Economic Issues and Poli cy 
Jennifer Lee Thomas, Communications/English 
Erin L. Tobin, Social and Rehabilitation Serv ices, 
Magna Cum Laude 
Michael Leo Tomasian, Psychology 
Christopher David Toppin, History 
Sean Edward Touhey, Management 
Lisa Marie Traficanti, English 
Eric Lee Tridenti, Management 
Britt Anne Trifone, Political Science 
Ryan Kimberly Tripp, History, Cum Laude 
Katie Lynn Turant, Social and Rehabilitation Se rvices, 
Cum Laude 
Edwin James Twomey, English 
Gregory David Ventura, Accounting 
Lynette Marie Walania, Psychology 
Andrew Adam Walsh, Political Science 
Kasey E. Walsh, Communications, Cum Laude 
Meaghan J. Walsh, English/Fine Arts 
Kristen Patrice Watson, Political Science, 
Magna Cum Laude 
Eve Weber, Social and Rehabilitation Se rvices 
Jennifer Lee Westerlind, Social and Rehabilitatio n Services 
Elizabeth Ann Whelan, Communications 
Darren Swen White, Mathematics 
Michelle Marie Whitworth, Economic Theory, 
Magna Cum Laude 
Novar Munro Whitworth, Management 
John Christopher Whyte, Economic Issues and Policy 
Scott Williams, Communications 
Lynne Wilson, History, Elementary Edu cation, Cum Laude 
Daria Ann Wojcik, English, Elementa ry Education 
Kathleen Mary Wood, Social and Rehabilitation Services, 
Cum Laude 
Erin Kathleen Woods, Economics with Business 
Concentration, Summa Cum Laude 
Scott Michael Wynne, Communications 
Alyssa Ann York, Biology 
Matthew Richard Zannelli, Biology with Concentration 
in Biotechnology/Chemistry 
Theodore Michael Zayka, English 
Joshua Edward Zielke, Communications 
Michael David Zucker, Global Studies 
( 
t 
(c) George A. Doyle Scholarship Award Recipient (e) Members of Delta Epsilon Sigma Honor Society 
(d) Marion Merit Award Recipient (f) Augustine Scholarship Award Recipient 
(*) degree in progress 
This is not an official docume nt of Assumption College 
I 
The Assumption College Mace 
in medieval times, a mace was a spiked war club, an effective weapon in combat. 
Later, it became a symbol of authority, and in the context of an academic 
community, has come to signify teaching authority. 
At Assumption College, education promotes self-discovery, but the true 
discovery of self must first take into account one's nature and purpose. The 
symbolism of the mace reflects the simple but essential elements that make for a 
full and responsible consideration of self, within the broader context in which 
there can be a full blossoming of the individual. 
An education at Assumption nurtures the growth of specific habits or, more 
precisely, virtues. These include the Intellectual Virtues, which guide the student 
to truth,- the Moral Virtues (prudence, justice, fortitude, and moderation), which 
enable a person to lead a good life,- and, most important of all, as Saint Paul and 
Saint Augustine would say, the Theological Virtues (faith, hope, and charity), 
which lead the Christian to ultimate happiness. The lettering in Latin on the 
three bands of the sterling node states simply the thrust of these essential virtues-. 
Intelligentia Adducitur Veritatem,- Voluntas Adducitur Bonum, Cor Adducitur 
Amorem. The staff could be considered a "lignum vitae" (tree of lif e), from which 
the virtues spring. The three upper branches of ebony and gold represent the 
virtues and their impact upon everyone at the College, symbolized by the 
multifaceted fluorite stone. 
At Assumption, it is t he community's shared vision that fosters a full flowering 
of the individual. The three blossoms of gold from the blue fluorite represent the 
individual coming to full m aturity in Christ, in accord with the College's motto: 
"Until Christ be formed in you." 
The Assumption College Mace was conceived, designed, created, and given as 
a gift to Assumption College by Paul A. Cavanagh of Greenville, Rhode Island. 
Medallion of the President of Assumption College 
The shield on the seal is d ivided into four sections by the cross, the symbol of Christ, denoting the 
College as a Catholic institution. It is a "fleu r-de-lisee" cross, a symbol that the College is located in the 
Diocese of Worcester, which also has this style of cross on its coat of arms. On the cross is an open book, 
representing the Gospel, which is the foundation of teaching at a Catholic institution, and also representing 
the Liberal Arts, which seek to lead the student to knowledge and wisdom. On the book are the letters ART 
(Adveniat Regnum Tuum, or Thy Kingdom Come), a phrase from the Lord's Prayer, which is the motto of 
the Assumptionists who founded the College in 1904. In the upper left quarter is the monogram of Mary 
with a crown above it, a symbol of the Blessed Virgin Mary in her Assumption. In the lower right quarter is 
the fleur-de-lis, a reminder of the French origins of the founding religious order. 
The Medallion is s uspended by a chain, the links of which consist of the letter "M" with a crown 
representing the Queenship of the Blessed Virgin Mary, Our Lady of the Assumption, patroness of the 
College. 
This presidential medallion was designed, created, and given as a gift to Assumption College by John 
Cavanagh of Greenville, Rhode Island. 
Academic Regalia 
The academic garb is derived from the 12th and 13th centuries, when most students and teachers were 
clerics and had taken at least minor holy orders. The assignment of colors to certain faculties was a much 
later development, and was standardized in the United States in the late 19th century. White was assigned 
to arts and letters, red, a traditional color of the church, was assigned to theology,- green, for herbs, went to 
medicine,- purple, the color of emperors, went to law,- and golden yellow, standing for wealth and alchemy, 
went to the sciences. Because philosophy means love and pursuit of wisdom, in the case of the Doctor of 
Philosophy (Ph.D.), dark blue represents the mastery of t he discipline of learning and scholarship in any 
field for which the degree is conferred, rather than in the discipline of philosophy alone. 
Gowns vary by degree. The bachelor's gown has pointed sleeves. The master's gown has oblong sleeves, 
the rear of which is cut square, and the front of which is cut in arcs. Both the bachelors and masters gowns 
are untrimmed. The doctor's gown has bell-shaped sleeves and is faced down the front with black velvet. 
Three bars of velvet cross each sleeve. Often the bars are black, but they may also be in the color distinctive 
to the discipline in which the degree has been conferred. 
In all cases, the exterior of the academic hood is black, and the interior is lined with the official color or 
colors of the institution that conferred the degree. The bachelors hood is three feet in length,- the masters 
is three and one-half feet,- and the doctor's is four feet. Only the doctor's hood has panels at the sides. The 
edges of the hoods are velvet, and are two inches, three inches, and five inches for the bachelors, masters, 
and doctor's degrees, respectively. The color of this trim is indicative of the subject to which the degree 
The mortar board cap may be made of soft or hard material and, as its name suggests, symbolizes the role 
of le arning in building an individual and shared future. The tassel is black or the color appropriate to the 
subject, with the exception of the doctor's tassel, which may be gold. 
For all academic purposes, including trimmings of doctors gowns, edging of hoods, and tassels of caps, 
the colors associated with different disciplines are as follows: 
pertains. 
Agriculture 
Arts, Letters, Humanities 
Commerce, Accountancy, Business 
Economics 
Education 
Fine Arts 
Law 
Library Science 
Medicine 
Music 
Oratory 
Philosophy 
Physical Education 
Science 
Theology 
Maize 
White 
Drab 
Copper 
Light Blue 
Brown 
Purple 
Lemon 
Green 
Pink 
Silver Gray 
Dark Blue 
Sage Green 
Golden 
Scarlet 
The above text is adapted from American University and Colleges, 13th ed. (New York, 1987), pp. 1917-18. 
Assumption Collie Alma fllatcr 
Lyrics: Beverly Sh aw Johnson (1985) Melody: Christe sanctorum (Anliphone, Paris, 1681) 
tt". 1 1 1=1 J h 
T— J 
t. fledge u>e o 
2. Our hearts u 
;—f—f 
d— 
ur 
nil 
^  - 4 -
Ixvy-al 
al*iuai 
• 
o 
-tl 
jSl 
) 
>e u 
—'—4 
to ^As-surnp-tic 
nthy\s'stirrer tic 
3 # " 
& c. 
n Col'le^ 
»n Col" lec e~ 
$ J r r if 
LUkose de - d i *c< 
Jier ban* ners u> 
n 
action 1 
a*vinj tt 
:=f= 
n 
"it 
J 
i 
pur-suit 
?ut&tan 
^— 
<£ k 
A-faj 
nourledc 
fou* raj e— 
9 \ 
UJtth * stands tk< 
Call jar | t  
Qfr , 
i tes 
-de 
—^ z 
t <£ tin 
-U-tj 
ne 
—4 
a 
h J—J-
ds us In 
ndj>rotec 
^ 
oar o 
t a sp 
LJ1—e 
truxudcli 
t rit 
mb 
ee-
9 - J J 1 i  « & 
I n search trutk and '• 
Xona live the hlue and. iuhtte-~'/ 
Written Lyon the occasion of the SO ̂ Anniversary 
of the fou ncCincj f jissunytion tolLaje. 

