  
529 
 
 
J. Biosci. | Vol. 28 | No. 5 | September 2003 | 529–531 | © Indian Academy of Sciences    
Clipboard 
Genetically decaffeinated coffee 
Coffee is a highly popular drink and has been central to many cultures, spreading across the globe –
from Indo-China to Europe, from the Arabs and Turks to the South Americans. The earliest written 
records of coffee date back to Yemen in the early 15th century, but its origin appear to be much 
earlier in Abyssinia (Ethiopia). The legend is that a shepard from Kaffe (Abyssinia) noticed that his 
goats became unusually excited on eating the leaves and fruit of a certain bush. This had the same 
effect on him. On learning about this, the Abbott at the local monastery tried to make a drink out the 
plant, but it was so bitter that he threw the entire pot into the fire. When the fruit started to burn, the 
beans inside produced a pleasant aroma. A drink was produced from roasted beans and coffee was 
born. Coffee was brought to the Malabar Coast of India by Arab traders and was distributed in the Old 
World largely through Arab and Dutch trade routes (http://www.ico.org/acoff/cofst .htm). 
 The rich flavour and aroma of coffee comes together with the nerve jangling effects of caffeine. It 
is present in coffee beans at a concentration of 2–3%, as also in tea leaves at around 5%. Caffeine is a 
secondary metabolite that is the product of nucleic acid catabolism and must be made by the plant for 
some specific function. It is speculated that caffeine may guard the plant against insect or pest attack, 
or prevent the germination of other seeds in the vicinity. The effect of caffeine on he huma  b dy is 
however better understood. These include short-term reactions such as palpitations, gastrointestinal 
disturbances, anxiety, tremor, increased blood pressure and insomnia. The adverse side effects of 
caffeine account for a substantial market for decaffeinated products. Decaffeinated coffee accounts 
for about 20% of all coffee sales in the USA, with the demand going up to 55% for those over 60 
years of age. 
 First developed in the early 20th century, decaffeination techniques used organic solvents to extract 
caffeine from the coffee bean. The organic residues often caused greater harm than caffeine. At 
present, decaffeination is carried out by supercritical extraction that involves washing the beans  
with liquid carbon dioxide. The procedure is not only expensive it also removes other compounds  
that give coffee its rich taste and aroma. There are some species of the Coffea plant that have low 
levels of caffeine in their seeds. However, these either make horribly bitter coffee or are difficult  
to grow. Plant breeders have also tried to transfer the low caffeine trait to Coffea arabica without  
any success. 
 This is where molecular biology has stepped in. Recent work by Japanese scientists has led to the 
isolation and characterization of enzymes responsible for caffeine biosynthesis and the genes coding 
for these enzymes. A report appearing in the 19 June 2003 issue of Nature has now used this infor-
mation together with the RNA interference (or RNAi) technique to create a coffee bean with reduced 
caffeine content (Ogita 2003). 
 The biosynthesis of caffeine starts with hypoxanthosine or xanthosine, themselves the products of 
hydrolytic deamination of adenosine or guanosine, respectively. Caffeine is synthesized from 
xanthosine through one ribose removal and three N-methylation steps (see figure 1). Earlier this year, 
Hiroshi Sano and colleagues at the Nara Institute of Science and Technology reported the cloning and 
expression of three cDNAs encoding the N-methyltransferases involved in caffeine biosynthesis (Uefuji  
et al 2003). These included CaXMT1, CaMXMT2 (theobromine synthase) and CaDXMT1 (caffeine 
synthase) that successiv ly add methyl groups to the N-7, N-3 and N-1 positions of the purine ring 
(see figure 1). A minor bisynthetic pathway also converts xanthine into caffeine through 3-methyl-
xanthine and theophylline. 
 In an attempt to produce genetically decaffeinated coffee beans, the same group constructed  
transgenic coffee plants in which expression of the theobromine synthase gene was repressed by 
J. Biosci. | Vol. 28 | No. 5 | September 2003 
Clipboard 
 
530
RNAi. This versatile technology involves the use of short (21–23 nt) pieces of complementary RNA. 
Once inside the cell, these RNAs bind to the target mRNA and mark these for degradation by the 
cellular machinery. This causes specific inhibition of gene expression and has been use  to create 
functional knockouts in species ranging from the nematode Ca norhabditis elegans and the fruitfly 
Drosophila melanogaster to mammals and plants (Dykxhoorn et al 2003). 
 The Japanese researchers designed hairpin constructs with fragments from the 3¢ untransla ed
region of the theobromine synthase mRNA and used these for Agarobacterium- ediated transforma-
tion of somatic embryos from C ffea canephora, a robust coffee plant grown in Central and West 
Africa, and throughout Southeast Asia (www.ico.org/frameset/coffset.htm). The seedlings that grew 
out on a selection medium were then tested for their theobromine and caffeine content. Compared  
to wild type plants, the transgenic pla ts showed up to 70% reduction in its caffeine content. Though 
the caffeine content in coffee beans was not tested, it is expected to reflect the reduced levels seen 
in leaves. The researchers are now applying this RNAi-based technique to C. arabica, which accounts 
for about three-fourths of the global market and is widely grown in Latin America, Central and East 
Africa, and India (http:hspinfo.org/toxin.htm). 
 Coffee is good, but can this approach be used to improve crops that feed the world’s hungry? An 
attractive target would be the plant Lathyrus ativus, commonly known as “grasspea”, or in India as 
“kesari dal”. The entire plant is used as fodder for livestock and is consumed by humans in many 
ways. It thrives in poor soil, during drought or waterlogging and contains twice as much protein as 
wheat (http:hspinfo.org/toxin.htm). However, it also contains an amino acid called b-N-oxalyl-L-a-b-
diaminopropionic acid (ODAP) that is a mimic of glutamate and a neurotoxin. This mimicry causes 
excessive triggering of the fast excitatory signals running through the brain and nervous system 
resulting in exhaustion and death of neurons. When consumed in large quantities, kesari dal causes a 
spastic disorder called lathyrism. If the biosynthetic pathway for ODAP is targeted analogous to that 
of caffeine, it may be possible to produce kesari dal with reduced levels of the toxin. Another target 
 
 
Figure 1. The biosynthetic pathway for caffeine. Solid and dashed arrows represent the major and minor path-
ways of caffeine biosynthesis, respectively. 
J. Biosci. | Vol. 28 | No. 5 | September 2003
Clipboard 
 
531 
may be the biosynthetic pathway for oxalic acid in tomato and spinach, as this is the main cause of 
kidney stones. 
 The initial observations on transcriptional co-suppression were made in plant systems. Subsequent 
developments in the field of RNA interference made initially in worms and fruitflies and then in higher 
animals appear to have come full circle. The technology appears poised for developing better crops in 
a world with shrinking land and water resources. 
References 
Dykxhoorn D M, Novina C D and Sharp P A 2003 Killing the messenger: short RNAs that silence gene 
expression; Nature Rev. Mol. Cell. Biol. 4 457–467 
Ogita S, Uefuji H, Yamaguchi Y, Koizumi N and Sano H 2003 Producing decaffeinated coffee plants; Nature 
(London) 423 823 
Uefuji H, Ogita S, Yamaguchi Y, Koizumi K and Sano H 2003 Molecular cloning and functional characteri-
zation of three distinct N-methyltransferases involved in the caffeine biosynthetic pathway in coffee plants; 
Plant Physiol. 132 372–380 
 
SHAHID JAMEEL 
International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, 
New Delhi 110 067, India 
(Email, shahid@icgeb.res.in) 
 
 
