Plant Physiol. (1994) 104: 29-35 
Tissue Leve1 Compartmentation of (R)-Amygdalin and 
Amygdalin Hydrolase Prevents Large-Scale Cyanogenesis in 
Undamaged Prunus Seeds’ 
Jonathan E. Poulton* and Chun Ping Li2 
Department of Biological Sciences, The University of lowa, lowa City, lowa 52242 
Plum (Prunus domestica) seeds, which contain the cyanogenic 
diglucoside (E)-amygdalin and lesser amounts of the corresponding 
monoglucoside (R)-prunasin, release the respiratory toxin HCN 
upon tissue disruption. Amygdalin hydrolase (AH) and prunasin 
hydrolase (PH), two specific ,8-glucosidases responsible for hy- 
drolysis of these glucosides, were purified to near homogeneity by 
concanavalin A-Sepharose 4B and carboxymethyl-cellulose chro- 
matography. Both proteins appear as polypeptides with moiecular 
masses of 60 kD upon sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel 
electrophoresis, but they exhibit different isoelectric points (PH, 
5.6-6.0; AH, 7.8-8.2). AH and PH were localized within mature 
plum seeds by tissue printing, histochemistry, and siiver-enhanced 
immunogold labeling. As was previously shown in black cherry 
(Prunus serotina) seeds (E. Swain, C.P. Li, J.E. Poulton [1992] Plant 
Physiol 100 291-300), AH and PH are restricted to protein bodies 
of specific procambial cells and are absent from the cotyledonary 
parenchyma, bundle sheath, and endosperm cells. In contrast, the 
cyanogenic glycosides in both plum and black cherry seeds, which 
were detected by tissue printing, occur solely in the cotyledonary 
parenchyma and are absent from the procambium and endosperm. 
It is  concluded that tissue level compartmentation prevents large- 
scale cyanoglycoside hydrolysis in intact Prunus seeds. 
In common with the catabolism of severa1 other classes of 
plant glycosides (e.g. glucosinolates [Bones et al., 1991; Poul- 
ton and Mprller, 19931 and o-coumaric acid glucosides [Oba 
et al., 1981]), the large-scale degradation of cyanogenic gly- 
cosides to HCN occurs only upon tissue disruption (Conn, 
1981). It is generally assumed that premature cyanogenesis 
is avoided in undamaged plants by compartmentalization of 
the glycoside and its catabolic enzymes at the tissue or 
subcellular levels. Recent studies involving a wide range of 
cyanophoric plant species and organs have not yet revealed 
a common compartmentation strategy (Poulton, 1988). In 
leaves of 6-d-old light-grown sorghum seedlings, the com- 
ponents of the “cyanide bomb” (i.e. the cyanoglycoside and 
its catabolic enzymes) are compartmentalized within different 
tissues. The cyanogenic glycoside (S)-dhurrin occurs in vac- 
uoles of epidermal cells, whereas its P-glucosidase and a- 
’ Supported by National Science Foundation grants DCB 8917176 
* Present address: Department of Plant Science, University of 
* Corresponding author; fax 1-319-335-3620. 
and IBN 9218929. 
Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721. 
29 
hydroxynitrile lyase are located almost exclusively within the 
underlying mesophyll tissue (Saunders and Conn, 1978; Ko- 
jima et al., 1979). For other species, localization data have 
been interpreted largely in terms of compartmentation at the 
subcellular level, although in most cases both glycosides and 
catabolic enzymes have not been unequivocally localized 
within the same cells (Kojima et al., 1983; Kakes, 1985; 
Frehner and Conn, 1987; Mkpong et al., 1990). 
In recent years, our laboratory has been investigating the 
catabolism of (R)-amygdalin [the P-gentiobioside of (R)-man- 
delonitrile] in rosaceous stone fruits using mature black cherry 
(Prunus serotina) seeds as an experimental system (Poulton, 
1993). Upon tissue disruption, this cyanogenic diglucoside is 
rapidly degraded to mandelonitrile and Glc by the sequential 
action of AH and PH. Subsequently, mandelonitrile disso- 
ciates either enzymically in the presence of MDL or nonen- 
zymically to release HCN and benzaldehyde. Immunocyto- 
chemical localization studies, using monospecific polyclonal 
antisera raised against each deglycosylated enzyme, revealed 
that these catabolic enzymes have intriguing tissue and cel- 
lular distributions (Swain et al., 199213). The P-glycosidases 
AH and PH are restricted to protein bodies of specific pro- 
cambial cells. In contrast, MDL shows highest levels within 
protein bodies of the cotyledonary parenchyma cells with 
lesser amounts in procambial cell protein bodies. A11 three 
enzymes are absent from the endosperm tissue and from the 
bundle sheath layer surrounding the procambium. To reveal 
how untimely cyanogenesis is prevented in intact black 
cherry seeds now requires the localization of amygdalin, a 
task made difficult by the low mo1 wt and high aqueous 
solubility of this glycoside and by the diminutive size of the 
seed. 
In the present study, the aforementioned polyclonal anti- 
sera were used to localize AH and PH in mature plum (Prunus 
domestica) seeds. Furthermore, amygdalin was localized at 
the tissue level in both black cherry and plum seeds by tissue 
printing. Taken together, the data from these and earlier 
studies (Swain et al., 1992b) strongly suggest that premature 
detonation of the Prunus cyanide bomb is prevented in un- 
damaged seeds by tissue level compartmentation. 
. 
Abbreviations: AH, amygdalin hydrolase; GAR, goat anti-rabbit; 
MDL, (R)-mandelonitrile lyase; 4-MUG, 4-methylumbelliferyl-(3-~- 
glucoside; PH, prunasin hydrolase; pI, isoelectric point. 
 www.plantphysiol.orgon January 12, 2020 - Published by Downloaded from 
Copyright © 1994 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.
30 Poul ton  a n d  Li Plant Physiol. Vol. 104, 1994 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
Plant Materials 
Mature black cherry (Prunus serotina Ehrh.) and plum 
(Prunus domestica, var Stanley) fruits were obtained locally. 
Pits (endocarp enclosing seed) were freed from exocarp and 
fleshy mesocarp tissues, surface sterilized with 0.52% (w/v) 
sodium hypochlorite for 20 min, and rinsed thoroughly with 
distilled water. Finally, they were blotted dry on paper towels 
and stored in plastic containers at 4OC until used. 
Chemicals and Biochemicals 
Nitrocellulose paper was obtained from Bio-Rad (Rich- 
mond, CA). Aldrich Chemical Co. (Milwaukee, WI) provided 
mercurous nitrate. Almond P-glucosidase (G-0395), which 
contains high AH, PH, and MDL activities, was purchased 
from Sigma. A11 other biochemicals and immunochemicals 
were obtained as previously described (Li et al., 1992; Swain 
et al., 1992b). 
Antisera 
The immunolocalization studies described here utilized 
two affinity-purified polyclonal antisera with demonstrated 
monospecificity toward black cherry AH and PH, respectively 
(Li et al., 1992). 
Partia1 Purification of Plum AH and PH 
A11 operations were undertaken at 4OC. Plum seeds (5 g) 
were homogenized with a pestle and mortar with 1 g of 
polyvinylpolypyrrolidone, 2 g of quartz sand, and 30 mL of 
buffer A (0.1 M His-HC1 buffer, pH 6.0). The homogenate 
was filtered through four layers of cheesecloth and centri- 
fuged for 25 min at 17,600g. The clear supematant was 
dialyzed ovemight against 4 L of buffer B (10 m~ His-HC1, 
pH 6.0, containing 0.17 M NaC1) and then subjected to Con 
A-Sepharose 4B chromatography as previously described (Li 
et al., 1992). Fractions displaying AH and PH activities were 
pooled and dialyzed ovemight against 4 L of buffer C (20 
m~ sodium acetate-HC1 buffer, pH 5.0). The resulting prep- 
aration was centrifuged for 5 min at 17,600g before applica- 
tion to a CM-cellulose (1 X 10 cm) column that had previously 
been equilibrated with buffer C. After the column was 
washed with 100 mL of buffer C to remove unbound pro- 
teins, bound proteins were eluted by a linear gradient (100 
mL) of O to 0.3 M NaCl in buffer C. AH and PH fractions 
were pooled separately, and each pool was concentrated to 
5 mL by ultrafiltration. 
Cel Electrophoresis 
IEF was performed on PhastGel IEF 3/9 gels at 15OC using 
the Pharmacia Phast System. Total proteins were visualized 
using a silver-staining kit (Pharmacia) according to manufac- 
turer’s instructions. AH and PH were located on native IEF 
gels by activity staining using the fluorogenic substrate 4- 
MUG. Gels were examined under UV light after 5 min of 
incubation in 0.2 M sodium acetate buffer, pH 4.75, contain- 
ing 5 mM 4-MUG. 
lmmunochemical Analysis 
The specificities of the P. serotina anti-AH and anti-PH 
antisera toward the corresponding plum hydrolases were 
analyzed by immunoblotting (Swain et al., 1992b). Crude 
plum seed homogenates as well as highly purified AH and 
PH were subjected to one-dimensional SDS-PAGE on 10% 
gels (Laemmli, 1970). Where appropriate, gels were stained 
with brilliant blue G-colloidal to visualize proteins. For im- 
munochemical analysis, proteins were electroblotted onto 
nitrocellulose membranes using a Bio-Rad Trans-Blot appa- 
ratus and challenged with either purified anti-AH or purified 
anti-PH antisera (previously diluted 1 : l O O  with blocking 
buffer (5% [w/v] nonfat dry milk in 10 ITLM Tris-HC1 [pH 
7.41, containing 0.9% [w/v] NaC1). In control blots, these 
antisera were replaced by preimmune serum. Immune com- 
plexes were visualized using horseradish peroxidase-conju- 
gated GAR IgG (diluted 1:500 in blocking buffer) and 4- 
chloro-1-naphthol (Swain et al., 1992a). 
Localization of AH by Tissue Print lmmunoblots 
Tissue printing was performed according to the method of 
Spruce et al. (1987). Thin seed sections were cut using a razor 
blade and transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane backed 
by three layers of Whatman No. 1 filter paper on a table top. 
A small piece of nonabsorbent paper was placed over the 
section. Slight finger pressure was applied for 30 s, and the 
nonabsorbent paper and tissue sections were removed from 
the membrane. Tissue blots were then immunoanalyzed as 
described previously (Swain et al., 1992a). 
Light Microscope-Leve1 lmmunolocalization of 
P. domestica AH and PH 
Plum AH and PH were localized at the tissue leve1 by 
silver-enhanced immunogold labeling using the monospecific 
P. serotina anti-AH or anti-PH antisera as the primary anti- 
body (Swain et al., 1992b). In brief, seed slices were fixed 
and dehydrated before embedment in LR White resin. Sec- 
tions (0.5-1.0 pm thick) were cut with a DuPont diamond 
knife on a Sorva11 Porter-Blum MT 2-8 ultramicrotome, col- 
lected on Superfrost (+) slides (Fisher Scientific), and dried 
ovemight at 42OC. They were subsequently exposed to pri- 
mary antisera (diluted 1:lO) and secondary antiserum (10- 
nm colloidal gold-conjugated GAR IgG, diluted 1:20) before 
treatment with a silver enhancement kit (Ted Pella, Inc.) 
(Swain et al., 1992b). The distribution of colloidal silver was 
recorded using an Olympus BH-2 light microscope equipped 
with an Olympus C-35 AD camera. 
Localization of Cyanoglucosides by Tissue Printing 
The tissue distribution of cyanoglucosides in Prunus seeds 
was detennined by tissue printing. Seeds were halved (trans- 
verse section) using a double-edged razor blade. Their cut 
surfaces were applied with slight finger pressure to a nitro- 
cellulose paper previously moistened with 20 mg mL-’ of 
aqueous almond P-glucosidase. After 3 to 10 s, the seeds 
were removed, and one drop of mercurous nitrate (saturated 
aqueous solution) was applied to the blot. Areas of the blot 
 www.plantphysiol.orgon January 12, 2020 - Published by Downloaded from 
Copyright © 1994 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.
Cyanogenesis in Mature Prunus Seeds 31
corresponding to cells originally containing amygdalin and/
or prunasin appeared black. The distribution of colloidal
mercury was recorded using an Olympus BH-2 light micro-
scope (dark-field illumination) equipped with an Olympus
C-35 AD camera. This method was modified to locate cells
containing both AH and PH by applying halved seeds
to papers presoaked in 50 rrtM amygdalin (rather than
,8-glucosidase).
Analysis of Cyanogen Content
Qualitative analysis of prunasin and amygdalin content of
plum seeds was accomplished according to the method of
Poulton and Shin (1983).
Protein Determination and Enzyme Assays
Protein was determined by the Bradford (1976) procedure
using a Bio-Rad protein assay kit with BSA serving as the
standard. AH and PH activities were assayed as previously
described (Kuroki and Poulton, 1986, 1987).
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Whereas the flesh of rosaceous stone fruits (e.g. plums,
peaches, cherries) is considered acyanogenic and has long
been enjoyed by animals including humans, their seeds have
been responsible for numerous cases of acute cyanide poi-
soning (Poulton, 1983). Containing both the cyanogenic di-
glucoside (R )-amygdalin (as major cyanogen) and its catabolic
enzymes, these seeds constitute miniature cyanide bombs
capable of rapid HCN release upon tissue disruption. Fortu-
nately, such large-scale, suicidal cyanogenesis is apparently
avoided in undamaged tissue by compartmentation. For sev-
eral years, our laboratory has been working to elucidate
whether the key components of the Prunus cyanide bomb
are compartmentalized at the tissue or subcellular levels. We
have made extensive use of mature seeds of black cherry (P.
serotina), a species native to the American Midwest. Employ-
ing monospecific, polyclonal antibodies raised against degly-
cosylated AH, PH, and MDL, each of these catabolic enzymes
was immunolocalized at the tissue and subcellular levels
(Swain et al, 1992b).
The two /3-glycosidases are restricted to the protein bodies
of the procambium, which ramifies throughout the cotyle-
donary storage parenchyma. It is interesting that, whereas
AH occurs within most procambial cells, PH is confined to
the peripheral layers of this tissue. By contrast, highest levels
of MDL are observed in protein bodies of cotyledonary
parenchyma cells, with only lesser amounts in procambial
cells. The bundle sheath layer surrounding the procambium
and the endosperm apparently lack all three catabolic en-
zymes. As previously noted (Swain et al., 1992b), the absence
of the hydrolytic enzymes in bundle sheath, cotyledonary
parenchyma, and endosperm cells renders these tissues par-
ticularly attractive locations for housing amygdalin. Unfor-
tunately, the already difficult task of localizing amygdalin is
compounded by the small size of the black cherry seed. To
facilitate our efforts to elucidate the compartmentation in
Prunus seeds, parallel experiments were undertaken using
plums (Prunus domestica), an economically important stone
fruit crop having much larger seeds. Qualitative analysis
showed that (R)-amygdalin predominates within these seeds,
but the monoglucoside (R)-prunasin is also present at far
lower levels.
Purification of P. domestica AH and PH
For use in immunoblotting analyses (see below), AH and
PH were purified to near homogeneity from mature plum
seeds by affinity and ion-exchange chromatography (Fig. 1).
In common with most other cyanogenic /3-glycosidases (Poul-
ton, 1988), these hydrolases are probably glycoproteins as
evidenced by their binding to Con A-Sepharose 4B and
elution by methyl-a-D-glucoside. The substantially purified
enzymes were then resolved by CM-cellulose chromatogra-
phy. Both ,8-glycosidases bound to this ion exchanger, with
PH eluting at lower (0-50 ITIM) and AH eluting at higher
(100-150 HIM) NaCl concentrations. This behavior is consist-
ent with the pi values of 5.6 to 6.0 and 7.8 to 8.2 for PH and
AH, respectively, obtained by PhastGel IEF (Fig. 2). Upon
SDS-PAGE, PH and AH appeared as major polypeptides of
60 kD (Fig. 1). By comparison, the corresponding P. serotina
hydrolases had the following pi values and polypeptide
molecular masses: PH, pi 4.0 to 4.5, 68 kD; AH, pi 5.8 to
6.4, 60 kD (Poulton, 1993).
Proof of Monospecificity of P. serotina Anti-AH and
Anti-PH Antisera
To utilize the available P. serotina anti-AH and anti-PH
antisera to immunolocalize the respective plum hydrolases
requires that their monospecificity be demonstrated. This
evaluation was made by western immunoblotting after one-
dimensional SDS-PAGE of crude plum seed extracts and of
highly purified plum AH and PH preparations. As shown in
Figure 1, each antiserum is monospecific for its corresponding
plum (3-glycosidase. In control experiments in which these
8 9
66.0
45.0-
34.7-
24.0-
14.3-
Figure 1. Western immunoblot analysis of the specificity of P.
serotina anti-AH and anti-PH antisera toward plum AH and PH.
Total plum seed proteins (5 Mg; lanes 1, 4, and 7) and purified plum
AH (0.5 Mg; lanes 2, 5, and 8) and PH (0.5 »%; lanes 3, 6, and 9)
were subjected to SDS-PAGE (10% gels). Proteins in lanes 1 to 3
were stained with brilliant blue C-colIoidal stain. Proteins in other
lanes were electroblotted onto nitrocellulose membranes and chal-
lenged with P. serotina anti-AH (lanes 4-6) or anti-PH antiserum
(lanes 7-9). Molecular masses of calibration proteins (Sigma) are
indicated in kD.
 www.plantphysiol.orgon January 12, 2020 - Published by Downloaded from 
Copyright © 1994 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.
32 Poulton and Li Plant Physiol. Vol. 104, 1994
Figure 2. Determination of the pis of plum AH and PH. The purified
enzymes (1 ^g each) were subjected to IEF on a PhastGel IEF 3/9
gel and detected by activity staining using the fluorogenic substrate
4-MUC. The pis of the broad-range pi markers (Pharmacia) are also
shown.
active antisera were replaced by preimmune serum, no im-
munostaining was observed (data not shown). Thus, the two
black cherry antisera were deemed suitable for immunolo-
calization studies with plum seeds.
Localization of Plum AH and PH by Immunochemical and
Histochemical Approaches
The localization of AH in transversely sectioned plum
cotyledons was first attempted by tissue print immunoblot-
ting (Spruce et al., 1987). Blots challenged with anti-AH
antiserum as primary antibody showed two linear series of
immunostained spots (Fig. 3A) corresponding to the arrange-
ment of procambial strands within the cotyledons. Control
blots exposed to preimmune serum exhibited no immuno-
staining (Fig. 3B). The procambial location of AH was sub-
sequently confirmed by silver-enhanced immunogold proce-
dures. When LR White-embedded cotyledon sections were
exposed to anti-AH antiserum as the primary antibody, im-
munolabeling was restricted to protein bodies of specific
procambial cells (Fig. 4A). The bundle sheath, cotyledonary
parenchyma, and endosperm cells remained unlabeled. Like-
wise, with anti-PH antiserum as the primary antibody, coty-
ledon sections again exhibited labeling only in procambial
cell protein bodies (Fig. 4B). By contrast, no immunolabeling
was observed in sections receiving preimmune serum as the
primary antibody (Fig. 4C). Close analysis of the serial sec-
tions shown in Figure 4, A and B, reveals that, as in black
cherry (Swain et al., 1992b), AH and PH exhibit cell-specific
distribution within the procambium. Neither enzyme occurs
in the smallest procambial cells, which because of their lack
of prominent protein bodies are regarded as being more
highly differentiated. AH is located in most of the remaining
procambial cells, whereas PH appears confined to the larger,
peripheral cells. In conclusion, plum AH and PH exhibit
tissue- and cell-specific distributions that are identical with
those previously described for the corresponding black cherry
hydrolases (Swain et al., 1992b).
Additional evidence supporting the procambial location of
plum AH and PH was obtained using indoxyl /3-D-glucoside
as an activity stain. Preliminary experiments had shown that
both highly purified plum hydrolases cleave this substrate to
the insoluble blue product indican (data not shown). When
transversely sectioned plum seeds were appressed to nitro-
cellulose membranes presoaked with indoxyl /3-D-glucoside,
the resulting blots showed linear rows of indican spots cor-
responding to the location of procambial strands across each
cotyledon (Fig. 3C). Identical data were obtained with black
cherry seeds (data not shown).
A * B
Figure 3. Localization of AH and PH within plum cotyledons by tissue print immunoblots and histochemistry. Tissue
prints of transversely sectioned plum seeds were exposed to either anti-AH antiserum (A) or preimmune serum (B) as
the primary antibody. Blots were subsequently incubated with horseradish peroxidase-conjugated CAR IgC, and the
locations of antigen-antibody complexes were visualized by addition of 4-chloro-1-naphthol and H2O2 (Swain et al.,
1992a). Histochemical localization of AH and PH is shown in C. Transversely sectioned plum seeds were appressed to
nitrocellulose papers presoaked with indoxyl /3-D-glucoside. The existence of AH and PH in procambial strands is revealed
by the product indican, which appears as two rows of darkly staining spots. Scale bar = 1 mm.
 www.plantphysiol.orgon January 12, 2020 - Published by Downloaded from 
Copyright © 1994 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.
Cyanogenesis in Mature Prunus Seeds 33
Figure 4. Tissue localization of plum AH and PH by silver-enhanced
immunogold labeling. Serial transverse sections of cotyledons em-
bedded in LR White resin were challenged with either anti-AH
antiserum (A), anti-PH antiserum (B), or preimmune serum (C) as
the primary antibody. After exposure to secondary antibody (col-
loidal gold-conjugated CAR IgC), poststaining was undertaken with
basic fuchsin. Immunogold-labeled antigens appear as black areas
after silver enhancement. Scale bar = 35 inm.
Tissue Print Localization of Cyanogenic Glycosides in
Plum and Black Cherry Seeds
After we ascertained the distribution of AH and PH in
plum and black cherry cotyledons, our attention then focused
on localizing amygdalin and prunasin. In common with other
unpigmented, water-soluble natural products of low mol wt,
the cyanogenic glycosides are notoriously difficult to localize
at the tissue and subcellular levels (Brunswick, 1921; Saun-
ders et al., 1977). Our early experiments approached the
problem of cyanoglycoside localization through protoplast
isolation and subfractionation, a method that was success-
fully used to locate dhurrin in sorghum leaf blades (Saunders
and Conn, 1978; Kojima et al., 1979). Although we optimized
techniques to obtain protoplasts in moderate yields from
black cherry seeds by cellulase/pectinase digestion (data not
shown), our protoplast populations are undoubtedly derived
from several tissues (e.g. storage parenchyma, bundle sheath,
and procambium). Therefore, we believed that this approach
would at best prove ambiguous in localizing these glycosides.
Encouraged by the successful localization of ascorbic acid
in plants by tissue printing (Pont-Lezica, 1992), we instead
modified this technique to provide a novel approach to
cyanoglycoside localization that is dependent on the ability
of cyanoglycosides to leak from the cut tissue surface and
become bound to nitrocellulose. Preliminary experiments
showed that when a drop of mercurous nitrate is applied to
a nitrocellulose paper previously spotted with aqueous
NaCN, a localized gray-black precipitate of metallic mercury
appears at those sites because of the chemical reaction
(Svehla, 1987):
2CN- + Hg22+ -» Hg I + Hg(CN)2
When applying this reaction to localize cyanoglycosides in
Prunus seed slices, one should bear in mind that, depending
on how the cyanide bomb components are compartmental-
ized, the glycoside-containing cells may or may not contain
AH and PH. Therefore, for meaningful tissue prints, it is
imperative that all cells, whether or not they contain endog-
enous catabolic enzymes, be first exposed to excess AH, PH,
and MDL. This would ensure that all amygdalin- and pru-
nasin-containing cells would liberate cyanide for subsequent
detection by mercurous nitrate. For this reason, halved seeds
were appressed for several seconds to nitrocellulose mem-
branes that had been presoaked with 20 mg mL"1 of almond
emulsin. The seeds were then removed and mercurous nitrate
was added without delay to react with any liberated cyanide.
Those cells originally containing amygdalin and/or prunasin
gave rise to easily visible, gray-black zones on such tissue
prints.
In tissue prints obtained in this manner, zones correspond-
ing to the cotyledonary parenchyma were intensely labeled,
indicating the presence of amygdalin and/or prunasin (Fig.
5A). Zones corresponding to the procambial strands were
easily visible as white areas on the rather uniform black
background generated by the cotyledonary parenchyma cells.
Thus, we conclude that these strands, although rich in AH
and PH, lack the cyanoglycosides. Zones corresponding to
the endosperm were also white. Taken together with the
immunocytochemical data described above, this indicates
 www.plantphysiol.orgon January 12, 2020 - Published by Downloaded from 
Copyright © 1994 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.
34 Poulton and Li Plant Physiol. Vol. 104, 1994
Figure 5. Localization of cyanoglucosides (A
and B) and their respective 0-glycosidases (C)
in mature Prunus seeds. Transversely sectioned
plum (A) and black cherry (B) seeds were ap-
pressed to nitrocellulose papers previously
moistened with aqueous almond /3-glucosi-
dase. After 3 to 10 s, the seeds were removed,
and a drop of mercurous nitrate was applied to
the blot to detect liberated cyanide. The pro-
cambial location of AH and PH in plum seeds
was confirmed by applying transversely sec-
tioned seeds to nitrocellulose papers pre-
soaked with 50 DIM amygdalin (C). Soon there-
after, the seeds were removed, and liberated
cyanide was detected by applying mercurous
nitrate. Scale bar = 1 mm.
B
that the endosperm lacks both the cyanoglycosid.es and the
hydrolases. Because of technical difficulties encountered with
the smallness of the black cherry seeds, tissue prints were
more difficult to obtain with this species, and they suffered
from poorer resolution. Nevertheless, blots were highly
suggestive that amygdalin is similarly distributed within black
cherry seed tissues (Fig. 5B).
Although not tested here, it is possible that this tissue-
printing technique might prove useful in localizing other
cyanoglycosides in organs of different cyanophoric species if
the nitrocellulose papers are presoaked in the appropriate
catabolic enzymes.
Tissue Print Localization of AH and PH in Prunus Seeds
The presence of AH and PH within the procambial strands
of plum and black cherry seeds was further confirmed by
modifying the above tissue-printing technique in the follow-
ing manner. Halved seeds were appressed for a brief period
to nitrocellulose blots presoaked with high amygdalin con-
centrations (50 HIM) before application of mercurous nitrate.
This modification was intended to minimize any effect of
endogenous amygdalin levels by providing excess glycoside
to all cells. As exemplified by the blot obtained with plum
seeds (Fig. 5C), such blots exhibited rows of spots that again
correlated with the position of the procambial strands in each
cotyledon. Unlike the indoxyl /3-o-glucoside blots, however,
these spots were ring or horseshoe shaped, rather than solid,
in appearance; this observation is fully consistent with the
peripheral location of PH within the procambium.
CONCLUSIONS
In the present study, a novel tissue-printing technique was
devised allowing the successful localization of the cyanoglu-
cosides in Prunus seeds to the cotyledonary parenchyma
tissue. Several approaches have now confirmed that AH and
PH are restricted in both black cherry and plum seeds to the
protein bodies of relatively few specific cells, in this case,
certain procambial cells. Having reviewed all available infor-
mation, it becomes clear that tissue level, rather than subcel-
lular level, compartmentalization prevents premature deto-
nation of the Prunus cyanide bomb in undamaged seeds.
Although tissue level compartmentation was also observed
in light-grown sorghum leaves (Kojima et al., 1979), it re-
mains to be seen whether this strategy is common to all
cyanogenic species. Current evidence with other cyanophoric
systems (Kojima et al., 1983; Kakes, 1985; Frehner and Conn,
1987; Mkpong et al., 1990) has been interpreted largely in
terms of subcellular compartmentation similar to that shown
by coumarinyl glucoside and its respective /3-glucosidase in
sweet clover (Oba et al., 1981). However, further studies will
be necessary in these cases to unequivocally exclude tissue
level compartmentalization.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors wish to thank Elisabeth Swain, Lankai Guo, and
Zihua Hu for helpful discussions and Linda C. Anthony for assistance
in manuscript preparation.
Received June 25, 1993; accepted September 12, 1993.
Copyright Clearance Center: 0032-0889/94/104/0029/07.
LITERATURE CITED
Bones AM, Thangstad OP, Haugen OA, Espevik T (1991) Fate of
myrosin cells: characterization of monoclonal antibodies against
myrosinase. ] Exp Bot 42: 1541-1549
Bradford M (1976) A rapid and sensitive method for the quantitation
of microgram quantities of protein utilizing the principle of protein-
dye binding. Anal Biochem 72: 248-254
Brunswick (1921) Der mikrochemische Nachweis pflanzlicher Blau-
saureverbindungen. Akademie Wissenschaften Wien 130: 383-436
Conn EE (1981) Cyanogenic glycosides. In PK Stumpf, EE Conn,
eds, The Biochemistry of Plants: A Comprehensive Treatise, Vol
7: Secondary Plant Products. Academic Press, New York, pp
479-500
Frehner M, Conn EE (1987) The linamarin /3-glucosidase in Costa
Rican wild lima beans (Phaseolus lunatus L.) is apoplastic. Plant
Physiol 84: 1296-1300
Kakes P (1985) Linamarase and other /3-glucosidases are present in
the cell walls of Trifolium repens L. leaves. Planta 66: 156-160
Kojima M, Iwatsuki N, Data ES, Villegas CDV, Uritani I (1983)
Changes in cyanide content and linamarase activity in wounded
cassava roots. Plant Physiol 72: 186-189
Kojima M, Poulton JE, Thayer SS, Conn EE (1979) Tissue distri-
butions of dhurrin and of enzymes involved in its metabolism in
leaves of Sorghum bicolor. Plant Physiol 63: 1022-1028
Kuroki GW, Poulton JE (1986) Comparison of kinetic and molecular
properties of two forms of amygdalin hydrolase from black cherry
(Prunus serotina Ehrh.) seeds. Arch Biochem Biophys 247: 433-439
Kuroki GW, Poulton JE (1987) Isolation and characterization of
 www.plantphysiol.orgon January 12, 2020 - Published by Downloaded from 
Copyright © 1994 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.
Cyanogenesis in Mature Prunus Seeds 35 
multiple forms of prunasin hydrolase from black cherry (Prunus 
serotina Ehrh.) seeds. Arch Biochem Biophys 255 19-26 
Laemmli UK (1970) Cleavage of structural proteins during the 
assembly of the head of bacteriophage T4. Nature 227: 680-685 
Li CP, Swain E, Poulton JE (1992) Prunus serotina amygdalin hy- 
drolase and prunasin hydrolase: purification, N-terminal sequenc- 
ing, and antibody production. Plant Physiol 100  282-290 
Mkpong OE, Yan H, Chism G, Sayre RT (1990) Purification, 
characterization, and localization of linamarase in cassava. Plant 
Physiol93: 176-181 
Oba K, Conn EE, Canut H, Boudet AM (1981) Subcellular localiza- 
tion of 2-(P-D-glucosyloxy)-cinnamic acids and the related 0-glu- 
cosidase in leaves of Melilotus alba Desr. Plant Physiol 68: 
Pont-Lezica RF (1992) Miscellaneous applications of tissue printing. 
In PR Reid, RF Pont-Lezica, eds, Tissue Printing: Tools for the 
Study of Anatomy, Histochemistry and Gene Expression. Aca- 
demic Press, San Diego, CA, pp 163-164 
Poulton JE (1983) Cyanogenic compounds in plants and their toxic 
effects. In RF Keeler, AT Tu, eds, Handbook of Natural Toxins, 
Vol 1: Plant and Funga1 Toxins. Marcel Dekker, New York, pp 
Poulton JE (1988) Localization and catabolism of cyanogenic glyco- 
Poulton JE (1993) Enzymology of cyanogenesis in rosaceous stone 
1359-1363 
117-157 
sides. Ciba Found Symp 140: 67-91 
fruits. In A Esen, ed, Symposium Series 533. American Chemical 
Society, Washington, DC, pp 170-190 
Poulton JE, Meller BL (1993) Glucosinolates. In PJ Lea, ed, Methods 
in Plant Biochemistry, Vol 9. Academic Press, London, pp 
Poulton JE, Shin SI (1983) Prunasin biosynthesis by cell-free extracts 
from black cherry (Prunus serotina Ehrh.) fruits and leaves. Z 
Naturforsch 38c: 369-374 
Saunders JA, Conn EE (1978) Presence of the cyanogenic glucoside 
dhumn in isolated vacuoles from Sorghum. Plant Physiol 61: 
Saunders JA, Conn EE, Lin CH, Stocking CR (1977) Subcellular 
localization of the cyanogenic glucoside of Sorghum by autoradi- 
ography. Plant Physiol59 647-652 
Spruce J, Mayer AM, Osborne DJ (1987) A simple histochemical 
method for locating enzymes in plant tissue using nitrocellulose. 
Phytochemistry 2 6  2901-2903 
Svehla G (1987) Vogel's Qualitative Inorganic Analysis. Longman 
Scientific/Wiley, New York, pp 164-166 
Swain E, Li CP, Poulton JE (1992a) Development of the potential 
for cyanogenesis in maturing black cherry (Prunus serotina Ehrh.) 
fruits. Plant Physiol 98: 1423-1428 
Swain E, Li CP, Poulton JE (1992b) Tissue and subcellular localiza- 
tion of enzymes catabolizing (R)-amygdalin in mature Prunus 
serotina seeds. Plant Physiol 100: 291-300 
209-237 
154-157 
 www.plantphysiol.orgon January 12, 2020 - Published by Downloaded from 
Copyright © 1994 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.
