Rev. Inst. Med. trop. S. Paulo
45(1):43-44, January-February, 2003
(1)Instituto de Medicina Tropical de São Paulo, Laboratório de Investigação Médica, Parasitologia, LIM/46, da Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de São Paulo, SP, Brasil.
Correspondence to: Cláudio S. Ferreira, Laboratório de Investigação Médica, Parasitologia, LIM/46, Av. Dr. Enéas de Carvalho Aguiar 500, 05403-000 São Paulo, SP, Brasil. Phone:
55.11.3066-7042. Fax: 55.11.3062-3622.
TECHNICAL REPORT
STAINING OF INTESTINAL PROTOZOA WITH HEIDENHAIN’S IRON HEMATOXYLIN
Claudio Santos FERREIRA(1)
SUMMARY
Due to its unique properties, iron hematoxylin has been traditionally recommended for staining intestinal protozoa. This process
can be simplified by reducing the number of steps and periods of permanence of the slides in some of the liquids used, without
detriment to the quality of the results. Thus iron hematoxylin becomes adequate for routine use. Hematoxylin is a natural dye
extracted from Haematoxylon campechianum, of the family Leguminosae. It must first be ‘ripened’, i.e. oxidized to hematein, which
reacts with ferric ammonium sulphate to produce the ferric lake (iron hematoxylin), a basic dye. Iron hematoxylin most frequently
stains regressively, i.e. the slides are first overstained and then differentiated.
KEYWORDS: Iron hematoxylin staining; Intestinal protozoa.
Iron hematoxylin staining of intestinal protozoa is often thought of
as too complex and time-consuming to be used in routine fecal
examinations. This process can, however, be simplified without detriment
to the quality of the results. Hematoxylin is a natural dye extracted from
Haematoxylon campechianum, a tree of the family Leguminosae. In
actual fact, to be used as a dye, hematoxylin must first be ‘ripened’, i.e.
oxidized to hematein, a slow process when its crystals are dissolved in
water and exposed to atmospheric oxygen1. Immediate ripening is
produced by the addition of an oxidizing agent1,4, such as hydrogen
peroxide (a few drops), to the solution. This must be done cautiously, as
further oxidation produces oxihematein, which is not a dye4. Hematoxylin
solutions usually contain a mixture of hematoxylin, hematein and
oxihematein. The well-known ‘hematoxylin’ staining properties result
from the combination of hematein with a mordant to produce a lake.
‘Iron hematoxylin’, which is quite stable and can stain sharply the fine
structures used to identify intestinal protozoa2, results from the reaction
of hematein with iron alum (ferric ammonium sulfate)1,4. It is mostly
used to stain regressively, which means that the slides are first overstained
and then differentiated. By adding a weak acid to the hematoxylin
solution, the iron lake can stain progressively. About 0.02 g of citric
acid or a few drops of acetic acid per 100 mL of the solution will be
enough.
Solutions:
Schaudinn’s solution
Saturated solution of mercuric chloride in distilled water 80 mL
Ethyl alcohol (95%) 20 mL
Acetic acid 3 mL
Iodine solution
Ethyl alcohol (95%) 98 mL
Tincture of iodine (2%) 2 mL
Mordant-differentiating solution
Iron alum (ferric ammonium sulfate) 2 g
Water (distilled) 98 mL
Hematoxylin solution
Hematoxylin 0.30 g
Water (distilled) 100 mL
Staining procedure:
1. On clean slides, prepare thin smears and while they are still wet,
immerse them in Schaudinn’s solution for about at least one minute.
Longer periods will cause no harm to the samples. If the smears do
not stick to the slides, place a small amount of blood serum upon the
slide and mix it with the fecal sample.
2. Rinse the slides in tap water (three changes).
3. Immerse them in alcohol (70 – 95%)
4. To remove remaining mercury residues, place the slides in the iodine
solution for one minute, then in alcohol (70 – 95%) for the same
period.
44
FERREIRA , C.S. - Staining of intestinal protozoa with Heidenhain’s iron hematoxylin. Rev. Inst. Med. trop. S. Paulo, 45(1):43-44, 2003.
5. Rinse in tap water (three changes).
6. Place in the mordant solution (about 30 seconds).
7. Rinse in tap water (four to five changes).
8. Place in the staining solution for three to five minutes (according to
the proportion of ‘ripe’ staining substance). Staining should be
controlled by inspection.
9. Rinse in water (three changes).
10. If differentiation is needed, immerse rapidly the slide in the mordant-
differentiating solution, then rinse in tap water (three to five changes).
11. Dehydrate by immersing in alcohol (70 – 95%) for about two minutes,
then in 95% alcohol, then in two changes of absolute alcohol (two
minutes each); immerse in xylene before mounting.
The last step can be dispensed with when the slides are intended for
immediate examination during routine diagnosis. A rapid mount is
obtained by placing a drop of glycerin between the smear and the
coverslip. Although optically not quite so good as the usual permanent
mounts, such preparations are compatible with the use of high-power
immersion objectives.
A simple test is suggested to evaluate the staining property of the
hematoxylin solution: place one drop of the hematoxylin solution and
one of the mordant solution side by side on the surface of a piece of
filter paper. As both solutions spread out, a black spot formed in the
region where they mix will be indicative of good staining property.
RESUMO
Coloração de protozoários intestinais pela hematoxilina
férrica de Heidenhain
Por suas propriedades peculiares, a hematoxilina férrica tem sido
tradicionalmente recomendada para a coloração de protozoários
intestinais. O processo pode ser simplificado sem perda de qualidade
dos resultados, tornando-se aplicável à rotina. Para isto reduzem-se o
número de passagens e os tempos de permanência das lâminas nos
líquidos usados. A hematoxilina é um corante natural, extraído de
Hematoxylon campechianum, da família Leguminosae. Antes do uso
ela deve “amadurecer”, isto é transformar-se, por oxidação, em hemateína,
que reage com o sulfato férrico-amônio para produzir a laca férrica
(hematoxilina férrica), um corante básico. Habitualmente, a hematoxilina
férrica é usada para corar regressivamente: as lâminas são primeiramente
supercoradas e ulteriormente diferenciadas.
REFERENCES
1. BAKER, J.R. - Cytological technique. 3.ed. London, Methuen, 1950.
2. CRAIG, C.F. & FAUST, E.C. – Clinical parasitology. 3. ed. revised. Philadelphia, Lea
& Febiger, 1943.
3. FERREIRA, C.S.; AMATO NETO, V.; ALARCÓN, R.S.R. & GAKIYA, E. –
Identification of Cryptosporidium spp. oocysts in fecal smears stained with
Heidenhain’s iron hematoxylin. Rev. Inst. Med. trop. S. Paulo, 43: 341 - 342, 2001.
4. Histologische Färbungen. http://archiv.ub.uni-marburg.de/diss/z1998/0089/1_9.htm
Received: 21 November 2002
Accepted: 06 December 2002
