228 R. J. GARNER AND R. ROBERTS
during the course of further work to be reported at
a later date. It is certain that there are differences
in the effect of diet on different tissues as Long
(1953) has found that, although the hexokinase
activity of intestinal mucosa is depressed by a low-
carbohydrate diet, that of intestinal muscle is
unaffected.
In so far as attempts to reproduce the anomalies
of carbohydrate metabolism observed in the adult
ruminant are concerned, these have been successful
and it may be concluded from the similarities
between the adult ruminant and the fat-fed non-
ruminant that many of the apparent abnormalities
in the former are due to the peculiar digestive
processes of the ruminant rather than to specific
hormonal or enzymic differences.
SUMMARY
1. After 17 hr. fasting, blood-sugar levels from
rats and hamsters fed on a high-fat diet from
weaning are consistently lower than those from
similar animals on a high-carbohydrate diet.
2. The reduced tolerance to intravenously
injected glucose induced by a high-fat diet has been
confirned using rats.
3. Restriction of the carbohydrate intake by
feeding excess fat or protein depresses both glucose
uptake and glycogen synthesis by isolated rat
diaphragm.
4. The hexokinase activity of kidney homo-
genates from rats and hamsters is depressed by high-
fat diets.
We are indebted to Messrs J. Bibby and Sons Ltd. for
supplies of arachis oil and hydrogenated palm oil, and to
Messrs C. Tinling and Co. Ltd. for monotype punchings.
Our thanks are also due to Professor R. A. Morton, F.R.S.,
for his constant interest, advice and encouragement. This
work was supported by a Research grant from the Agri-
cultural Research Council.
R,EFERENCES
Gilmore, R. C. & Samuels, L. T. (1949). J. biol. Chem. 181,
813.
Good, C. A., Kramer, H. & Somogyi, M. (1933). J. biol.
Chem. 100, 485.
Hansen, R. G., Rutter, W. J. & Samuels, L. T. (1951).
J. biol. Chem. 192, 243.
Himsworth, H. P. (1933). Clin. Sci. 1, 1.
King, E. J. (1951). Micro-Analy8i8 in Medical Biochemistry,
2nd ed. London: Churchill.
King, E. J. & Garner, R. J. (1947). J. clin. Path. 1, 30.
Long, C. (1952). Biochem. J. 50, 407.
Long, C. (1953). Biochem. J. 53, 7.
Lundbaek, K. & Stevenson, J. A. F. (1948). Fed. Proc.
7,75.
Osborne, T. B. & Mendel, L. B. (1913). J. biol. Chem. 15,
317.
Potter, V. R. & Elvehjem, C. A. (1936). J. biol. Chem. 114,
495.
Reid, R. L. (1950a). Aust. J. agric. Res. 1, 182.
Reid, R. L. (1950b). Aust. J. agric. Res. 1, 338.
Reid, R. L. (1952). Aust. J. agric. Res. 3, 160.
Samuels, L. T., Gilmore, R. C. & Reinecke, R. M. (1948).
J. Nutr. 36, 639.
Somogyi, M. (1933). J. biol. Chem. 103, 665.
Somogyi, M. (1945). J. biol. Chem. 160, 69.
Sweeney, J. S. (1927). Arch. int. Med. 40, 818.
Evidence for the Occurrence of y-Methylene-aE-oxoglutaric Acid
in Groundnut Plants (Arachis hypogaea)
BY L. FOWDEN AND J. A. WEBB
Department of Botany, Univer8ity College, Gower Street, London, W.C. 1
(Received 12 August 1954)
The isolation of two new amino acids, y-methylene-
glutamic acid and y-methyleneglutamine, from
groundnut plants (Arachi8 hypogaea) was described
by Done & Fowden (1951, 1952). More recently
these two compounds have been isolated from tulips
(Tulipa ge8neriana) by Zacharius, Pollard &
Steward (1954), and their presence has been
indicated in hops (Humulus lupulus) by Harris &
Tatchell (1953). Although these compounds have
a limited distribution within the plant kingdom,
there are indications that they are of considerable
importance in the metabolism of those species in
which they occur. y-Methyleneglutamic acid can,
under the influence of the transaminase systems
present in groundnut plants, transfer its a-amino
group to a-oxoglutaric, oxalacetic or pyruvic acids
(Fowden & Done, 1953a), whilst y-methylene-
glutamine appears to be important in the transport
of nitrogen within this species (Fowden, 1954).
a-Oxo acids have been the subject of several
detailed investigations, and a-oxoglutaric, oxal-
acetic, pyruvic, and glyoxylic acids have, by
characterization as their 2:4-dinitrophenylhydra-
zine (DNPH) derivatives, been found to be widely
OXO ACID FROM GROUNDNUT PLANTS
distributed in plant and animal tissues. Recently
Steward and his co-workers, using a new method
for the identification of DNPH derivatives, have
obtained preliminary evidence for the presence of
additional keto acids in plants, and detected the
keto-acid analogues of valine and y-methylene-
glutamic or y-methylglutamic acids (Towers,
Thompson & Steward, 1954). Towers & Steward
(1954) claim to have isolated the latter keto acid, as
itsDNPH derivative, from tulips. After completion
of the transamination studies using groundnut
extracts referred to above, we considered y-methyl-
ene-oc-oxoglutaric acid to be a possible constituent
of groundnut plants, and commenced an investiga-
tion of the a-keto acids present in groundnut
seedlings. We now report the isolation of this un-
saturated keto acid as its DNPH derivative, to-
gether with more rigorous proof of its chemical
identity than has so far been published. A brief
description of some of the present experiments has
appeared earlier (Fowden & Webb, 1954).
Preliminary experiments were performed to
reveal the number and probable nature of the keto
acids present in six-day-old seedlings. Aqueous
deproteinized extracts of the seedlings were treated
to form the DNPH derivatives of the keto acids,
which were then separated on paper chromatograms.
One strong spot, moving just in advance of that
of the derivative of oc-oxoglutaric acid, was not
attributable to any known keto acid, but did occupy
the same position on chromatograms as the de-
rivative of the keto acid (presumably y-methylene-
o-oxoglutaric acid) arising from y-methyleneglut-
amic acid by biological transamination.
Having established the probable nature of the
new keto acid, larger quantities of seedlings were
extracted, and about 12 mg. of the pure DNPH
derivative of the acid finally obtained, after it had
been separated from the derivatives of other keto
acids by cellulose-powder column and paper-
chromatographic procedures. Since the keto acid
has not been chemically synthesized, a biologically
synthesized reference substance was prepared by
transamination from y-methyleneglutamic acid
and oc-oxoglutaric acid; the structure of this amino
acid has now been confirmed by chemical synthesis
(Wailes, Whiting & Fowden, 1954). The natural and
synthetic DNPH derivatives so obtained behaved
identically when subjected to the following treat-
ments: (a) paper chromatography, (b) melting-point
determinations, (c) hydrogenation in the presence of
Adam's catalyst, (d) visible spectra determinations,
(e) infrared spectra determinations on Nujol mulls,
(f ) X-ray spectra determinations oftheir ammonium
salts and (g) oxidation by hydrogen peroxide.
Hydrogenation, in yielding an amino acid
identical with y-methylglutamic acid, alone estab-
lished that the new keto acid was probably y-
methylene- (or y-methyl-) a-oxoglutaric acid. To
ensure that reduction of the-C=- bond had not
accompanied transamination during the biological
synthesis of y-methylene-ac-oxoglutaric acid from
y-methyleneglutamic acid (so yielding y-methyl-
oc-oxoglutaric acid), the DNPH derivatives of the
natural and synthetic acids were oxidized with
hydrogen peroxide, and the products investigated
by organic acid-paper chromatography. Malonic
acidwas the only oxidation product that could be so
identified, and would be expected according to
scheme A. The derivative of y-methyl-oc-oxoglutaric
acid would be expected to yield methylsuccinic
acid by similar treatment (see scheme B). A small
quantity of this latter derivative, prepared by
transamination from synthetic y-methylglutamic
acid, did in fact yield methylsuccinic acid as the
main oxidation product.
CH2 COOH NOxt 0 :COO.H
II ~~~~~~~oxidation A-I
HOOC.C .CH2.C=N .NH y NO2 - f- H:OOC:. .CH2.C O ? unstable
oxidation
HOOC.CH,.COOH+2CO2
Scheme A.
CH3 COOH NO2 CH3 'fOOtH
I oxidation
HOOC.CH.CH2.C4N.NH ONO2 - - HOOC.CH.CH2.C0
fH4 oxidation
HOOC.CH.CH2.COOH+CO2
Scheme B.
229
L. FOWDEN AND J. A. WEBB
EXPERIMENTAL
Plant material. Groundnut seeds were grown in moist
sawdust at 25-30° for 6 days. Each seedling weighed about
2 g. fresh weight upon harvesting, and had developed a
branched root system and the first two immature leaves.
Preparation of the DNPH derivatives of the keto acids. The
seedlings, washed free from adhering sawdust, were macer-
ated with an equal weight of distilled water in an 'Atomix'
blender. The mush was strained through muslin, and the
pH ofthe filtrate adjusted to approximately 4-2 with H2SO,.
The proteins were coagulated by warming to 500, and
removed by centrifuging. The keto acids were converted
into their DNPH derivatives by treatment of 10 vol. of the
supernatant with 1 vol. of a saturated solution of 2:4-
dinitrophenylhydrazine in 2N-HC1 for 20 min. at 400. The
derivatives were extracted into ether by four successive
extractions (1 vol. ether to 4 vol. supernatant), and the
combined ether extracts reduced to one-fifth oftheir original
bulk. The concentrated ether extract was then shaken with
successive small volumes of 10% (w/v) Na2CO3 soln. until
no further appreciable amounts of acidic DNPH derivatives
entered the NaCO3 layers. Unchanged 2:4-dinitrophenyl-
hydrazine remained in the ether layer at this stage. The
combined Na2CO3 layers, maintained at 00, were made
slightly acid by the addition of conc. HCI and the DNPH
derivatives of the keto acids again completely transferred
to ether. These extracts were combined and evaporated to
dryness, yielding a residue consisting mainly of the DNPH
derivatives ofthe keto acids, together with smaller amounts
of dark-coloured resinous substances. This extraction pro-
cedure was modified from those published by El Hawary &
Thompson (1953) and Cavallini & Frontali (1954).
Preliminary identification experiments
In these experiments 100 g. fresh weight of seedlings were
treated as above to obtain the mixed DNPH derivatives of
their oxo-acid constituents. The residue was dissolved in
the minimum volume of 0-5N-NH3 soln., and a measured
fraction applied as a short band to a sheet ofWhatman no. 3
filter paper. A similar band was applied adjacent to the first,
and contained the derivatives of a-oxoglutaric, glyoxylic
and pyruvic acids prepared from 40 ,ug. of each of the pure
acids by a procedure similar to that above. The chromato-
gram was then developed for 20 hr. using n-butanol satur-
ated with 6% (w/v) NH3soln. as the mobile phase (Fincham,
1953). The appearance ofthe chromatogram is reproduced in
Fig. 1. The derivatives of pyruvic and glyoxylic acids each
gave two spots on the developed chromatogram. The seed-
lings contained oxo acids co-chromatographing with
ao-oxoglutaric, pyruvic and glyoxylic acids, and four
additional acids giving DNPH derivatives. One of these
formed a strong band moving slightly in advance (Rp 0-14)
of the o-oxoglutaric acid derivative, and was the subject of
the further investigations to be described. The three other
unknown derivatives formed fainter bands and moved at
lower R, values than ao-oxoglutaric acid. Their nature has
not been further investigated.
A small amount of the DNPH derivative of y-methylene-
ac-oxoglutaric acid, admixed with a larger amount of the
a-oxoglutaric acid derivative, was prepared by the pro-
cedure outlined above from the mixture ofthe two keto acids
resulting from transamination between 2 mg. y-methylene-
glutamic acid (natural) and 2 mg. of oc-oxoglutaric acid in
I955
the presence of a dialysed groundnut extract (reaction con-
ditions as Fowden & Done, 1953a). The derivative of
y-methylene-ac-oxoglutaric acid also flowed slightly in
advance of that of a-oxoglutaric acid, and was inseparable
from the unknown (RF 0-14) after the chromatogram had
been developed for 3 days in the n-butanol-NH3 solvent
system.
Larger-scale preparations
Isolation of the unknown DNPH derivative from seedlings.
Groundnut seedlings (2 kg., fresh wt.) were treated by the
above extraction procedure and yielded about 1 g. of
residue containing the mixed DNPH derivatives. A pre-
liminary purification of the unknown derivative was
accomplished on a cellulose-powder column. Dry Whatman
cellulose powder (200 g.), previously extracted with N-HCI
followed by N-NaOH, was mixed with n-butanol saturated
with 6% (w/v) NH3 soln. and poured as a slurry into a
column of 50 mm. diameter. Frequent tamping ensured
tight packing, and gave a column of 290 mm. length. The
DNPH derivatives were dissolved in 20 ml. of the same
solvent, and applied slowly to the column. The column was
developed with more solvent, slight suction being used to
obtain a percolation rate of about 50 ml./hr. After 5 hr. the
development was stopped, the unknown material having
formed a separate, and fairly well-defined band about 8 cm.
down the column. The DNPH derivative of a-oxoglutaric
acid had also formed a fairly discrete band, but the de-
rivatives of glyoxylic and pyruvic acids, which moved down
the column more rapidly, remained incompletely resolved.
Excess solvent was allowed to drain from the column, and
Origin
A
B,
Cl
82
C2
Solvent
Rf
0-0
0-2
- 0-4 -
-0-6-
0-8 -
i.o L~
(a)
Origin
A
x
B,
C,
B2
C2
Front
(b)
Fig. 1. Representation of a chromatogram on Whatman
no. 3 filter paper developed in the n-butanol-NH3 solvent
system containing the DPNH derivatives prepared from
(a) a standard mixture (containing 40pg. each acid) of
pure a-oxoglutaric acid (A), glyoxylic acid (B1 and B2)
and pyruvic acid (C1 and C.), and (b) the keto acids
occurring in extracts of six-day-old groundnut seedlings.
X is the unknown keto-acid derivative investigated in
this paper; Y represents three further unknown com-
pounds which have not been investigated.
230
OXO ACID FROM GROUNDNUT PLANTS
then the cellulose packing was carefully extruded to obtain
the portion containing the unknown derivative. The re-
maining solvent was removed from this by drying in vacuo
at laboratory temperature.
The derivative was extracted from the dried cellulose
powder using four lots of 25 ml. of 0-5N-NH, soln. The
combined extracts were made slightly acid by addition of
conc. HCI, and the derivative was then quantitatively trans-
ferred to ether. A light-yellow residue remained on removal
of the ether. Paper chromatograms revealed that it con-
sisted of the unknown, contaminated by small amounts of
the derivative of a-oxoglutaric acid. The contaminant was
removed by applying the residue in a 25 cm. band near to
the top edge of a sheet of Whatman no. 3 filter paper and
developing the chromatogram for 40 hr. in the n-butanol-
NH3 solvent system. Complete resolution of the two sub-
stances occurred, and the unknown derivative was eluted
from the stronger band by 0-5N-NH3 soln. After acidifying
the extract with conc. HCI, the derivative was again trans-
ferred to ether, and obtained as a yellow residue upon
evaporation. This residue was re-extracted with dry ether
(any NH4Cl carried over into the former wet ether layers
would remain undissolved), and the extract again evapor-
ated to yield 12 mg. of the unknown.
Preparation of the DNPH derivative of y-methylene-a-
oxoglutaric acid by transamination. An extract of four-day-
old groundnut seedlings was prepared by grinding them
with washed sand and a small amount of 0-025M potassium
phosphate buffer, pH 7-4. The centrifuged extract was
dialysed for 20 hr. against a stream of 0-05M potassium
phosphate buffer, pH 7-4 at 20. No amino or keto acids
could be detected in this dialysed extract, which was used
as a source oftransaminases. A 10 ml. portion ofthe extract
was added to a mixture of 25 mg. of a-oxoglutaric acid and
25 mg. of y-methyleneglutamic acid (natural), previously
adjusted to pH 7-4 with NaOH and made up to 10 ml. with
water. This reaction mixture was incubated at 370 for 4 hr.;
at the end of this time determinations on measured fractions
showed that glutamic and y-methyleneglutamic acids were
the only amino acids, and ac-oxoglutaric and y-methylene-
ax-oxoglutaric acids the only keto acids present in the
mixture. The keto acids were converted into their DNPH
derivatives and isolated as previously; 40 mg. of mixed
derivatives resulted, about 70% consisted of the ac-oxo-
glutaric acid derivative. The two derivatives were first
separated on a 40 x 220 mm. cellulose column, followed by
final purification of the y-methylene-a-oxoglutaric acid
derivative on paper chromatograrns as described above for
the unknown. The yield of the pure derivative was 10 mg.
Identity of the unknown derivative
The unknown derivative was shown to be identical with
the biologically synthesized y-methylene-oc-oxoglutaric
acid derivative by the following criteria.
Chromatographic behaviour. The two derivatives were in-
separable on paper chromatograms developed in the
n-butanol-NH3 solvent for 5 days, during which time they
had moved about 35 cm. down the paper.
Melting-point determinations. The unknown had m.p. 2280
(decomp.), whilst the DNPH derivative of y-methylene-ac-
oxoglutaric acid had m.p. 2240 (decomp.). The mixed m.p.
was 2260 (decomp.). All m.p.'s were corrected.
Hydrogenation. Towers et al. (1954) showed that when
DNPH derivatives of keto acids were hydrogenated in the
presence of a suitable catalyst, the analogous amino acids
were produced, and could be identified by paper-chromato-
graphic methods. Solutions of about 1 mg. of the unknown
and of the synthetic derivative in 0-5N acetic acid, to which
a trace of Adam's platinum oxide had been added, were
hydrogenated using a hydrogen pressure of 50 lb./sq.in. in
a stainless-steel bomb with constant shaking. No derivative
remained after 15 min. as judged by the colourless nature of
the solutions. The acid conditions used greatly reduced the
time stated as necessary for complete reaction by Towers
et al. (1954), who worked in neutral solution. The solutions
were evaporated to dryness, and the residues redissolved in
lOOp1. portions ofdistilled water. Each solution (20pA.) was
applied as spots to each of four chromatograms, together
with marker spots containing suitable mixtures of known
amino acids including y-methylglutamic acid. The chro-
matograms were developed in water-saturated phenol, the
n-butanol-NH3 solvent above, collidine-lutidine mixture
(Dent, 1947), and the n-butanol-acetic acid mixture of
Partridge (1948), and the amino acids detected after nin-
hydrin spraying. Both the unknown and synthetic deriva-
tives yielded a well marked spot ofan amino acid inseparable
from y-methylglutamic acid in all four solvent systems,
together with a trace of another amino acid identified as
y-amino-a.-methylbutyric acid by chromatographic com-
parison with a sample of this amino acid prepared by
hydrogenation of y-amino-oc-methylenebutyric acid, iso-
lated by Fowden & Done (1953b). This non-x-amino acid
presumably arose by slight decarboxylation during the
reduction of the DNPH derivatives, and this may be com-
pared with a similar behaviour observed for the derivatives
of other dicarboxylic keto acids (Towers et al. 1954). We
have observed that there is a tendency for decarboxylation
to occur more rapidly, with the production of increased
amounts of cu-amino acids, as the pH of the solution sub-
jected to reduction is raised.
Visible absorption spectra. The absorption spectra of
equimolar solutions of the two derivatives in N-NaOH, and
ofa similar solution ofthe DNPH derivative ofo-oxoglutaric
acid, were determined over the wavelength range 380-
700 m,u. using a Unicam SP. 500 spectrophotometer (Fig. 2).
540
Wavelength (m,u.)
Fig. 2. Reproduction of the visible absorption spectra of
the DPNH derivatives of keto acids; 0-005% (w/v) in
N-NaOH. , derivative of oc-oxoglutaric acid;
+ - -- +, derivative of the biologically synthesized
y-methylene-oc-oxoglutaric acid; *---, derivative of
the unknown keto acid investigateh4.
VoI. 59 231
L. FOWDEN AND J. A. WEBB
Those of the uinknown and the derivative of y-methylene-
a-oxoglutaric acid are seen to be virtually identical,
but they differ from that of the a-oxoglutaric acid
derivative.
Infrared 8pectra. The infrared absorption spectra of
Nujol mulls of the two derivatives were compared (Fig. 3).
It will be seen that the two spectra possess all the same main
absorption frequencies, and only differ very slightly in the
relative intensities of these absorption peaks.
X-ray-diffraction 8pectra. The two derivatives in the form
of their ammonium salts were subjected to comparative
X-ray-diffraction analysis. The diffraction lines obtained
from the unknown were more diffuse than those obtained
from the synthetic derivative, but the two spectra appeared
to be essentially identical. When the unknown and syn-
thetic derivatives were compared as free acids, their
diffraction patterns differed, presumably due to differences
in the crystalline forms of the two derivatives.
Oxidative degradation. Trialexperiments showed that the
DNPH derivative of a-oxoglutaric acid could be oxidized to
succinic acid (the expected product) by H.O2. The a-oxo-
glutaric acid derivative (1 mg.) was treated with 100 1. of
30% (w/v) H202soln. at 100° for 20 min., and the remaining
solution chromatographed on a sheet of Whatman no. 2
filter-paper strip against marker spots of a-oxoglutaric and
succinic acids containing l00 pg. of each acid. The lower
organic layer of the two-phase mixture produced after
equilibration of 80 ml. CHCl3, 80 ml. tert.-amyl alcohol,
80 ml. water and 30 ml. 98-100% (w/v) formic acid was
used as the developing solvent (L. E. Bentley, unpublished),
and after complete removal of the solvent, the chromato-
gram was evenly sprayed with a 60% (v/v) ethanolic
solution of bromocresol green adjusted to pH 5-5. The
positions of the organic acids were revealed as yellow areas
on a greenish blue background. The only detectable organic
80 -
70 -
- 60
C
E 40
C
10
-)n (
I955
acid produced during the oxidation flowed to a position
identical with that of succinic acid (R. 0.63); the spot of
a-oxoglutaric acid had an Rp value of 0-46.
The same conditions were used to oxidize the unknown
and the derivative of y-methylene-a-oxoglutaric acid,
which, if identical, should both yield malonic acid. The
latter acid was added as an additional marker to the
chromatograms developed in the same solvent. The only
oxidation product detected in either oxidized solution was
an organic acid moving at the same R, value (0 54) as that
determined for malonic acid.
In order to establish that the DNPH derivative of
y-methyl-m-oxoglutaric acid did not give malonic acid as the
main oxidation product under these conditions, a small
amount of the derivative was prepared and isolated in a
similar manner to that already described for y-methylene-
m-oxoglutaric acid, by using 5 mg. of y-methylglutamic acid
as the starting material in the transamination reaction.
On oxidation of the derivative of y-methyl-a-oxoglutaric
acid with H202, an organic acid chromatographically
identical with methylsuccinic acid (R, 0-77) appeared
as the main oxidation product.
DISCUSSION
From the literature it appears that y-methylene-o-
oxoglutaric acid is a new keto acid that has not been
chemically synthesized. In order to obtain the
DNPH derivative of the keto acid, we had therefore
to resort to a biological synthetic method, using
y-methyleneglutamic acid as the starting material.
The recent chemical synthesis of this amino acid
(Wailes et al. 1954) has established its structure,
60 '
,-II..
0
50 IC
30 I--
20
10
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14
Wavelength (J.)
Fig. 3. Reproduction of the infrared absorption spectra of Nujol mulls of (a) the DPNH derivative of
y-methylene-ac-oxoglutaric acid, and (b) the derivative of the unknown keto acid investigated.
232
Vol. 59 OXO ACID FROM GROUNDNUT PLANTS 233
whilst many detailed investigations of the trans-
amination reaction have established its mechanism
as firmly as those ofmost chemical syntheses. There
can therefore be little doubt conceming the
structure of the biologically synthesized keto acid,
unless enzymic reduction of the -C=C- bond had
also occurred.
The evidence obtained by hydrogenation and
oxidative degradation, coupled with our general
experience with groundnut plants, in which we have
never obtained any evidence for the natural
occurrence of the saturated y-methyl derivative of
glutamic acid or ofenzymes capable of reducing the
y-methylene derivative, proved that the biological
synthesis did in fact yield the unsaturated y-
methylene-oa-oxoglutaric acid. The identity of the
DNPH derivative ofthis keto acid with the material
isolated from the groundnut seedlings is firmly
established by the variety of the comparative
methods used.
Although Towers & Steward (1954) consider their
substance B to be the 2:4-dinitrophenylhydrazone
of y-methylene-oc-oxoglutaric acid, they record a
much higher m.p. (268-270° decomp.) for their
material than we have observed for either the
derivative of the natural keto acid (228°) or the
biologically synthesized acid (2240). The reason for
this discrepancy is not immediately obvious, for
although geometrical isomerism is possible in
DNPH derivatives, it seems unlikely that such
isomers would differ widely in their m.p.'s. We
consider that we have presented the stronger evi-
dence in support of the exact nature of our isolated
derivative, and note that our recorded m.p.'s
(224-228°) are of the order that might be predicted
from those recorded for other DNPH derivatives of
a-keto dicarboxylic acids (oxalacetic acid, 2110;
a-oxoglutaric acid, 2190; from El Hawary &
Thompson, 1953).
Seedlings, rather than mature plants, were
extracted because they could be grown and handled
more easily. Earlier analyses (Fowden, 1954) had
also demonstrated that a very rapid production of
y-methyleneglutamine and y-methyleneglutamic
acid accompanied the process of germination, and
a similarly rapid accumulation of y-methylene-o-
oxoglutaric acid seemed likely. Further experi-
ments are in progress to determine the rates of
production of this acid and other keto acids during
seedling growth, and their distribution in the
different organs of more mature plants.
Provided the process used for the extraction ofthe
DNPH derivative of y-methylene-x-oxoglutaric
acid from the seedlings was reasonably efficient, the
yield (12 mg. from 2 kg. fresh weight) suggests that
the difficulties likely to be encountered in the
isolation of useful amounts of the free acid from
seedlings would be very great. These facts empha-
size the need for a suitable chemical method of
synthesis of the keto acid, giving amounts that
would be of use in studying its metabolism in the
plant. The low concentrations of this and other oxo
acids found in seedlings are probably indicative of
their rapid rates of turnover, and it seems plausible
that y-methylene-a-oxoglutaric acid is an inter-
mediate stage in the synthesis of y-methylene-
glutamic acid from carbohydrate or lipid storage
materials, being converted into the amino acid
either by transamination or directly by reductive
amination with ammonia.
SUMMARY
1. The keto acids present in extracts of ground-
nut seedlings (Arachi8 hypogaea) were investigated
and characterized by paper chromatography of
their 2:4-dinitrophenylhydrazine (DPNH) deriva-
tives. m-Oxoglutaric, glyoxylic and pyruvic acids
were identified, whilst comparablo amounts of a
new keto acid were also present in the seedlings.
2. Using cellulose-powder column and paper-
chromatographic procedures, 12 mg. of the DNPH
derivative of the new keto acid were isolated from
2 kg. of seedlings.
3. Using a variety of physical and 'chemical
methods, the DNPH derivative of the new keto acid
was shown to be identical with the corresponding
derivative of y-methylene-oc-oxoglutaric acid
(HOOC . C(:CH2).CH2 . CO 0-COOH)
prepared by biological transamination from the
analogous amino acid.
4. The implications of the presence of the new
keto acid in the seedlings are discussed.
We wish to thank Professor Kathleen Lonsdale, F.R.S.,
and Dr L. J. Bellamy for arranging the X-ray and infrared
spectra comparisons respectively, Dr L. E. Bentley for
supplying unpublished information regarding the solvent
used for organic acid chromatography, and Dr J. A.
Elvidge for a gift of methylsuccinic acid. We are also
indebted to the Royal Society for a grant in aid ofapparatus,
whilst one of us (J.A.W.) expresses gratitude to the Agri-
cultural Research Council for a personal maintenance grant.
REFERENCES
Cavallini, D. & Frontali, N. (1954). Biochim. biophy8. Acta,
13, 439.
Dent, C. E. (1947). Biochem. J. 41, 327.
Done, J. & Fowden, L. (1951). Biochem. J. 49, xx.
Done, J. & Fowden, L. (1952). Biochem. J. 51, 451.
El Hawary, M. F. S. & Thompson, R. H. S. (1953).
Biochem. J. 53, 340.
Fincham, J. R. S. (1953). Biochem. J. 53, 313.
Fowden, L. (1954). Ann. Bot., Lond., (in the Press).
234 L. FOWDEN AND J. A. WEBB I95
Fowden, L. & Done, J. (1953a). Nature, Lond., 171,
1068.
Fowden, L. & Done, J. (1953 b). Biochem. J. 55, 548.
Fowden, L. & Webb, J. A. (1954). Biochem. J. 58,
111.
Harris, G. & Tatchell, A. R. (1953). J. Inst. Brew. 59,
371.
Partridge, S. M. (1948). Biochem. J. 42, 238.
Towers, G. H. N. & Steward, F. C. (1954). J. Amer. chem.
Soc. 76, 1959.
Towers, G. H. N., Thompson, J. F. & Steward, F. C. (1954).
J. Amer. chem. Soc. 76, 2392.
Wailes, P., Whiting, M. C. & Fowden, L. (1954). Nature,
Lond., 174, 130.
Zacharius, R. M., Pollard, J. K. & Steward, F. C. (1954).
J. Amer. chem. Soc. 76, 1961.
The Estimation of Thiols and Disulphides by Potentiometric Titration
with Silver Nitrate
BY R. CECIL AND J. R. McPHEE
Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford
(Received 23 August 1954)
This paper describes further developments in the
estimation of thiols by potentiometric titration
with silver nitrate. A previous paper (Cecil, 1950)
described a method in which the thiols were allowed
to react with a known excess of silver nitrate
followed by back-titration with potassium bromide.
Although the results then obtained agreed well with
the theoretical figures, it has now been shown that
the agreement was due to compensation of errors.
It has been found that these errors can be avoided
by titrating the thiols directly with the silver
nitrate in buffered solutions. The silver mercaptides
formed tend, in most cases, to form complexes with
additional silver ion which can interfere with the
determination of the thiol end point. However, the
stability of these complexes varies greatly with pH,
and a range of pH has been found for every com-
pound in which the thiol group can be titrated
satisfactorily.
As the pH is raised, so the concentration of silver
ion in equilibrium with free thiol falls and becomes
so low that reproducible potentials cannot be
obtained with a silver electrode. This difficulty has
been overcome by the development of the silver
thiol electrode (Cecil, 1954) which is reversible to
the thiol as well as to the silver ion.
As in the previous work, the disulphides are first
allowed to react with sodium sulphite and the thiol
formed estimated in the same way.
THEORETICAL
Reaction of thiols with silver nitrate. The reaction of thiols
with silver nitrate is described by the equations
RS +Ag+RSAg, (1)
RS + H+=RSH. (2)
In the presence of solid silver mercaptide
S =[Ag+] x [RS-], (3)
where S is defined as the solubility product. The equilibrium
equation for (2) is
K [RS-] x [He] 4[RSH] ' (4)
K being the dissociation constant of the thiol. This may be
expressed in terms of total thiol concentration, c, where
c =[RSH] +[RS-] so that (4) now becomes
[RS-] = c . K/(K + [H+]), (5)
and substituting in (3)
S = [Ag+] ec. K/(K + H+). (6)
The end-point titre (Cep) is reached when the total silver
added equals the total thiol originally present:
[Ag+ep] + [RSAg] cep +[RSAg],
or [Ag+ep] =cep. (7)
From (6) the silver ion concentration at the end point is
[Ag+ep] = SK[+]) (8)
where S' is the apparent solubility product under any one
set of conditions.
This equation is of limited application at present because
of the difficulties of defining the various quantities. K is
known only for thiols that do not contain amino groups.
Different ionic species of the same compound are likely to
have different solubility products and these must be taken
into account when using eqn. 6. Lastly, species other than
thiol, for example sulphite and silver mercaptides, bind silver
ion sufficiently to depress the end-point concentration
below the predicted value. To this extent therefore the
method is empirical, and sufficient of each titration curve
must be plotted to determine the end-point potential.
If there is to be a simple relation between [Ag+] and c
during a titration, then the term K/(K + [H+]) must remain
constant. Adequate buffering is therefore essential.
Because of the low silver ion concentration prevailing in the
presence of thiol, the usual buffer salts acetate, phosphate,
borate, as well as nitric or sulphuric acid, may be used,
provided their concentrations are kept low.
