Milk thistle nomenclature: why it matters in cancer research and pharmacokinetic studies 
 
By: David J. Kroll, Heather S. Shaw, and Nicholas H. Oberlies 
 
Kroll, D.J., Shaw, H.S. and Oberlies, N.H. (2007) Milk thistle nomenclature: Why it matters in cancer research  
 and pharmacokinetic studies. Integrative Cancer Therapies 6, 110-119. 
 
Made available courtesy of SAGE Publications: http://ict.sagepub.com/ 
 
***Note: Figures may be missing from this format of the document 
 
Abstract: 
Extracts of milk thistle have been recognized for centuries as "liver tonics" and are well-known to prevent or 
reverse hepatotoxicity of reactive drug metabolites or naturally occurring toxins. Milk thistle extracts are now 
under intense study in the experimental therapeutics of cancer for chemoprevention, treatment, and amelioration 
of chemotherapy side effects. Precision in nomenclature, however, has lagged behind this progress. The crude 
commercial product of milk thistle is termed silymarin, a complex of at least 7 flavonolignans and 1 flavonoid 
that comprises 65% to 80% of milk thistle extract. From silymarin is derived silibinin, a semipurified fraction 
once thought to be a single compound but now recognized as a 1:1 mixture of 2 diastereoisomers, silybin A and 
silybin B. The distinction between silymarin and silibinin is not only important to understanding the historical 
literature, but thorough characterization and use of chemically defined mixtures in preclinical and clinical 
studies are essential to the progress of these botanical compounds as human therapeutics. As a result, we urge 
clinicians and preclinical investigators alike to exercise rigor in nomenclature and use pure compounds or 
precisely defined chemical mixtures in subsequent studies. Herein, we provide a guide to the proper 
nomenclature and composition of milk thistle extracts and discuss the known pharmacokinetic studies of these 
botanical medicines. The drug-interaction potential of these extracts appears to be quite low, and in fact, 
silibinin appears to synergize with the antitumor effects of some commonly used chemotherapeutics. However, 
some precautions are advised as high-dose, phase II studies are conducted.  
Keywords: milk thistle; silymarin; silibinin; flavonolignans; stereochemistry; cancer; epithelial  
Article: 
 
  "The beginning of wisdom is to call things by their proper names." 
  Chinese proverb attributed often to Confucius 
Milk thistle (Silybum marianum [L.] Gaertn. [Asteraceae]; synonym Carduus marianus L.) is a hardy and often 
invasive plant indigenous to the Mediterranean region whose achenes, often referred to as seeds, have been 
valued for their medicinal qualities. (1) Most research and application of the phytomedicinal extract of milk 
thistle seeds had been directed toward disorders of the liver, particularly cirrhosis, hepatitis, and in protection 
and treatment of xenobiotic-mediated liver injury. In the early 1990s, several reports began to appear suggestive 
of milk thistle as a potential cancer chemopreventive agent. The 1994 report of Agarwal et al (2,3) 
demonstrating silymarin inhibition of tumor promotion by phorbol ester in the SENCAR mouse is viewed 
widely as the catalyst for studying milk thistle as a cancer preventive and potential treatment. The subsequent 
progress of milk thistle in cancer research will be covered elsewhere in this volume by Deep and Agarwal. (4) 
The purpose of this review is instead to discuss the chemistry and composition of milk thistle extracts, discuss 
the pharmacokinetic studies with milk thistle extracts, and urge a renewed attention to detail in milk thistle 
nomenclature to clarify the literature and maximize the potential clinical applications of this promising 
botanical medicine.  
Nomenclature of Milk Thistle Compounds  
In the August 2000 issue of Hepatology, the prolific Czech consortium of milk thistle researchers led by Drs 
Vilim Simanek and Vladimir Kren emphatically raised attention to proper milk thistle nomenclature in a letter 
to the editor entitled, "Silymarin: What Is in the Name ...? An Appeal for a Change of Editorial Policy." (5) 
Their essay, in response to a review of herbal products for liver diseases, raised several key issues that 
converged on the inappropriate nomenclature and incomplete characterization of milk thistle products published 
in preclinical and clinical studies. The authors closed their editorial as follows:  
 
  We strongly recommend that investigators should either (1) give the 
  exact composition of the "silymarin complex" or "the principle" used, 
  or (2) use pure, chemically defined compounds. Implementation of these 
  changes would greatly clarify the literature describing the biology of 
  silymarin and its constituents. (5) 
This issue is not a new one in the study of botanical medicines, as most plant extracts contain a number of 
bioactive compounds yet are usually only standardized (if at all) for 1 compound or a number of compounds 
with similar spectroscopic characteristics. As milk thistle extracts prove increasingly useful in preclinical 
studies, progression to clinical studies will require complete and precise chemical characterization of study 
materials. As members of our research group were the first to purify milligram quantities of all 7 milk thistle 
flavonolignan compounds for biological studies, (6) we hope to answer the call of our colleagues in promoting 
clarity in the nomenclature of biologically active compounds derived from milk thistle.  
Table 1 contains a quick glossary of terms used to describe milk thistle components in the literature, often 
interchangeably and, unfortunately, incorrectly. The term "silymarin," a clever condensation of the plant's Latin 
binomial, was introduced originally in 1968 by the revered German phytochemist, Professor Hildebert Wagner, 
and colleagues to describe the mixture of flavonolignans that had been characterized at the time (silybin, 
isosilybin, silydianin, and silychristin). (7,8) Although many studies were conducted over the ensuing 3 
decades, the Research Triangle Institute Natural Products Laboratory first reported on the resolution and 
purification of all 7 flavonolignans from this mixture (Figure 1). (6) What was first termed silybin can be 
resolved into 2 diastereoisomers, silybin A and silybin B. A similar diastereoisomeric mixture exists, yielding 
isosilybin A and isosilybin B (which are regioisomers of silybin A and silybin B). The other 3 flavonolignans, 
which are "constitutional" or "structural" isomers of the aforementioned compounds, are silychristin, 
isosilychristin, and silydianin. The isolation and absolute stereochemistries of all these compounds were 
subsequently confirmed by Lee and Liu. (9) The chemical structures of the 7 flavonolignans and taxifolin are 
shown in Figure 1.  
 
 
Figure 2 displays high-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) chromatograms of silymarin, silibinin, and 
isosilibinin mixtures relative to all of the compounds isolated individually (silybin A, silybin B, isosilibin A, 
and isosilybin B on the left panel and taxifolin, isosilychristin, silychristin, and silydianin on the right panel). 
For those readers who are not well-versed in the intricacies of chromatography, one can consider these 
chromatograms like fingerprints. It is our intention to demonstrate the remarkable differences between these 
substances, which are all too often treated in the literature as being equivalent. From this, it should be apparent 
that silymarin is a complex mixture, silibinin and isosilibinin are each a mixture of 2 compounds, and all of the 
compounds can be isolated from each other (see Table 1 for a quick guide to these terms).  
Why is silymarin such a complex mixture? Silymarin is simply the initial extract of milk thistle seeds made with 
ethanol (or other solvents (10,11)) that contains 65% to 80% total flavonolignans and a small amount of a 
flavonoid (taxifolin, barely discernable in the HPLC chromatogram of silymarin) (Figure 2), with the remainder 
containing fatty acids and polyphenolic compounds. (1,6,12) The most commonly cited silymarin product used 
in clinical trials is Legalon, or Thisilyn in the United States, a milk thistle extract sold by Madaus AG that is 
standardized to 80% silymarin. Hence, a 175-mg capsule of Thisilyn contains 140 mg of a mixture of the 8 
compounds in Figure 1.  
The most abundant compounds in silymarin are the 2 diastereoisomers that comprise the semipurified mixture, 
silibinin. One of the problems with silibinin reports in the literature is that it is considered a single compound 
when, in fact, it is 2: roughly equal percentages of silybin A and silybin B. Even Sigma-Aldrich, the source of 
silibinin for most preclinical studies, continues to sell its silibinin (#S0417) with a description that implies it is a 
purified single compound from silymarin.  
Why the Nomenclature Matters Outside of Chemistry  
First, and most obviously, any preclinical or clinical study should be informed by the knowledge of whether one 
is testing a mixture of 8 compounds or 2. Particularly in the case of silymarin, the abundance of each of the 
compounds may vary depending on the source of botanical material, supplier, and extraction processes 
employed.  
Nature is variable, even within the same species of plant grown in the same exact place. This fact is well-
accepted by those who enjoy wine, where a bottle created by the same vintners, grown on the same vines, but 
produced in 2 different years can be quite distinct. The same can be true of herbal materials. Yet, all too often in 
the scientific literature, many herbal extracts are treated, erroneously, as being completely equivalent. (13) In 
clinical studies of pharmaceuticals, GMP-grade material is used such that the identity and reproducibility of the 
study agent can be ensured. In clinical studies of botanicals, however, this is often not the case, making 
comparisons between trials nearly impossible.  
Biologically, the relative importance of each compound is emerging as pure compounds are isolated from 
silymarin or silibinin in quantities sufficient for pharmacological evaluation. The importance of mixtures or 
pure compounds will likely depend on the biological endpoint under study and the intended therapeutic 
intervention. For example, the silymarin mixture has been shown to contain a modest ligand for the [beta] form 
estrogen receptor (ER[beta]). (14) ER[beta] expression may serve to prevent breast cancer growth and serve as 
an antagonist to the mitogenic effects of ER[alpha]. (15-18) Follow-up transcriptional activation studies have 
revealed that silybin B and taxifolin are the only compounds in silymarin capable of stimulating an 
estrogenresponsive reporter plasmid construct in T47D breast cancer cells. (19) Both are of similar potency 
([EC.sub.25] of 4.4 and 11.0 [micro]M, respectively), but taxifolin achieved a higher level of maximal 
stimulation. (19) We have shown that 3 silymarin products range from 21.6% to 23.8% silybin B, whereas 
taxifolin is present only at 1.6% to 2.2%. (12) With regard to silymarin, silybin B may be most important for its 
ER[beta] activity, but the data also suggest that pure taxifolin might be investigated individually as a breast 
cancer chemopreventive.  
 
 
In our work with prostate carcinoma cells in culture, (12) 4 compounds had the most consistent antiproliferative 
effects across LNCaP, DU145, and PC3 cells: silybin A, silybin B, isosilybin A, and isosilybin B. Of these, 
isosilybin B was uniformly the most potent compound, but isosilybin A was equally efficacious (DU145) in 
some cases, whereas silybin B was as efficacious in others (PC3). In the androgen-dependent LNCaP prostate 
carcinoma cell line, prostate-specific antigen (PSA) secretion was most effectively suppressed by isosilybin A 
and isosilybin B. (12) Therefore, a combination of these 2 compounds, which we term "isosilibinin," may be 
preferable for future studies in prostate carcinoma.  
Conversely, the free radical scavenging activity of pure compounds is reported to vary considerably, with 
silydianin and silychristin exhibiting 2- to 10-fold greater potency than the silibinin mixture. (20) Silydianin and 
silychristin are present exclusively in silymarin; they are absent from silibinin. This factor likely accounts for 
the observation that, on a mass basis, silymarin is 8-fold more potent than silibinin as a free radical scavenger. 
(20)  
Therefore, as biological studies progress, it remains important to make the distinction between silymarin and 
silibinin, and their respective and distinct compositions. In fact, 1 herbal marketer has already cited our 2005 
Cancer Research paper (12) and labels their silymarin product explicitly as containing isosilybin B, the most 
broadly potent of the flavonolignans in arresting prostate cancer growth (Mega Silymarin with Isosilybin B, 
Life Extension, Hollywood, Fla). This clever marketing, however, obscures the truth that all silymarin products 
we have tested contain some isosilybin B, albeit at concentrations at 2.1% to 4.4% by weight. (12) Other 
compounds are equally effective at higher concentrations, but this is not the case in all biological endpoints. 
Hence, a careful analysis of the biological activities of each pure compound should be undertaken in any system 
where either preparation exhibits promising activity.  
The distinction between silymarin and silibinin is also important as clinical investigators might seek to pool 
existing studies for meta-analyses. Even silymarin products vary in chemical composition among themselves 
depending on the source of the milk thistle extract. So, there is some hesitation in even comparing results with 
silymarin products obtained from different suppliers, for example, as shown in the pharmacokinetic results of 
Schulz et al. (21) While silymarin does indeed contain a subset of the compounds in silibinin (silybin A and 
silybin B), we would further hesitate to pool silymarin and silibinin data, as the nonsilibinin compounds in 
silymarin may have distinct effects. Indeed, some of these effects may be overlapping and redundant, such as 
suppression of human prostate carcinoma cell proliferation in vitro. (12) But depending on the outcome 
monitored, it is entirely possible that silymarin and silibinin may behave differently. Therefore, in any 
consideration of the clinical responses to milk thistle extract, careful distinction should be made between 
silymarin and silibinin, at the very least.  
A Few Words About Units of Concentration  
There is 1 caveat as milk thistle studies are discussed: nearly all published pharmacokinetic studies use total 
silibinin as the measurement but treat it as a single pure compound, expressing its concentration in terms of 
molarity, usually micromolar ([micro]M). Semantically, molar values should be reserved for pure compounds. 
Concentrations of mixtures, like silibinin and silymarin, are usually referred to in the natural products literature 
in micrograms per milliliter ([micro]g/mL), particularly because mixtures often contain compounds with 
different molecular weights. Expression in molarity helps one compare potency of compounds that differ in 
their molecular (or formula) weight. In the case of silibinin, both compounds share the same molecular weight 
of 482.1, and in silymarin, 7 of the 8 primary compounds also share this same molecular weight.  
 
 
Hence, a "30-[micro]M" solution of silibinin is actually a mixture of 15 [micro]M silybin A and 15 [micro]M 
silybin B because we know silibinin is roughly a 1:1 mixture of each compound. 12 However, in a 
pharmacokinetic study, a reported concentration of 30 [micro]M silibinin in plasma does not tell one the 
respective contributions of each compound, particularly because each compound can be handled differently by 
the body. This is not purely a semantic issue of chemistry because 1 study has demonstrated that after in vitro 
incubation with liver microsomes, silybin B is glucuronidated far more efficiently than is silybin A. (22) 
Therefore, it is highly likely that these 2 compounds have distinct pharmacokinetic characteristics after being 
administered orally as silibinin.  
Now that analytical methods exist to separate the various milk thistle flavonolignans, (6,9,23) we encourage 
those conducting future pharmacokinetic studies to use the molarity term only for pure compounds. In 
discussions that follow, however, we will use the term "[micro]M silibinin equivalents" to refer to studies that 
treat silibinin as a single compound.  
Pharmacokinetics of Milk Thistle Compounds--Low-Dose Studies  
Clinical studies of milk thistle extracts in cancer have lagged behind preclinical studies, but there have been 2 
very recent, repeated dose-escalation phase I pharmacokinetic studies (24,25) that have followed from several 
single- and repeated-low-dose studies published in the 1990s. These studies are essential in moving milk thistle 
extracts forward as potentially useful antitumor adjuncts for the simple and similar reason that many 
pharmaceutical candidates do not move forward to efficacy trials: they fail to achieve meaningful plasma or 
tissue concentrations. Therefore, a primary purpose of pharmacokinetic studies is to provide assurance and 
correlation that the dose administered gives rise to plasma and/or target tissue concentrations consistent with 
those required to produce effects in vitro. One fault of many clinical studies of botanicals is that adequate 
pharmacokinetic analyses are not completed prior to initiating efficacy trials. We have noted previously that 
some botanicals may fail in efficacy trials not because the botanical is itself without activity, but because the 
dosing was not sufficient to achieve pharmacologically meaningful concentrations. (26)  
Pharmacokinetic studies of milk thistle extracts are particularly important in making in vitro-in vivo correlations 
because the flavonolignans are notorious for their poor and erratic bioavailability. A 1995 study (21) revealed 
that among 3 silymarin products standardized for similar silibinin content, total bioavailability of a single dose 
varied by 2.2-fold, and peak plasma concentrations varied by nearly 3-fold. Another study reported on 1 
participant from a group of 9 whose peak plasma silibinin concentrations were 20-fold greater than the mean of 
the other 8. (27)  
To maximize oral bioavailability, the formulation most commonly employed in pharmacokinetic trials has been 
a mixture of silibinin and phosphatidylcholine sold by Indena SpA (Milan, Italy) as silipide, Siliphos[R], or IdB 
1016. Barzaghi et al (27) reported on a trial in normal healthy volunteers given 120 mg silibinin equivalents bid 
for 8 days. Mean peak plasma concentrations at day 1 and day 8 were 240 ng/mL and 183 ng/mL, 
corresponding to 0.50 and 0.38 [micro]M, respectively. Terminal half-life ranged from 2.6 to 3.4 hours. This 
early study noted that the flavonolignans were highly conjugated to glucuronic acid with under 3% of the total 
dose recovered in the urine.  
Weyhenmeyer et al (28) sought to identify the disposition of the 2 silibinin diastereoisomers but only referred to 
them as isomer 1 and isomer 2 owing to the lack of reference standards at the time (we now surmise these to be 
silybin A and silybin B, respectively) (Figure 2). In this study, 6 healthy male volunteers were given single 
doses of a silymarin product (Legalon 140, Madaus AG, Koln, Germany) standardized to 51 mg silibinin 
equivalents per capsule in a 4- way change-over design for dose escalation (102, 153, 203, and 254 mg 
silibinin). The bioavailability and peak plasma concentrations of isomer 1 were 2- to 3-fold greater than that of 
isomer 2, and mean peak plasma concentrations of combined isomers ranged from 0.24 [micro]M (at the 102-
mg dose) to 0.66 [micro]M (at the 254-mg dose) silibinin equivalents.  
Schandalik et al (29) examined biliary secretion of flavonolignans because the liver is the drug target for 
traditional uses of the herb in mushroom poisoning. These investigators examined both silipide and silymarin 
(source not defined), both dosed at 120 mg total silibinin. Remarkably, peak concentrations of silibinin 
equivalents achieved a mean of 116 [micro]g/mL (240 [micro]M) in the bile after silipide and 29 [micro]g/mL 
(60 [micro]M) after silymarin. Hence, biliary concentrations were 250 to 1000 times plasma concentrations 
reported previously. This study was also notable for examining other flavonolignans in bile. The low-abundance 
isosilybin diastereoisomer mixture appeared in bile at nearly the same concentrations as silibinin, despite the 
former being present in silymarin at one tenth the concentrations of silibinin. Unfortunately, the plasma 
determinations in this study were of low sensitivity such that even silibinin was only detectable in 2 of 9 
patients. Nevertheless, this study is often cited as evidence for the 4.2-fold preferential bioavailability of 
silibinin from silipide versus silymarin.  
As this last study was completed about the time of the first milk thistle chemoprevention paper from the 
Agarwal group, (2) one must consider the concentrations of silibinin required in vitro to observe the tumor cell 
growth-arresting effects in the interpretation of past and current pharmacokinetic studies. In studies of various 
epithelial cancer cell lines, double-digit micromolar concentrations of silibinin equivalents have usually been 
required to observe changes in most endpoints. The secretion of IGFBP-3 by prostate carcinoma cells occurs 
with concentrations as little as 2 [micro]M, (30) but the [IC.sub.50] of silibinin equivalents for growth 
inhibition or apoptosis is usually greater than 20 [micro]M in most studies. (12,31) In 2002, Singh et al (32) 
conducted the most complete pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic studies in athymic nude mice harboring 
DU145 human prostate carcinoma xenografts. Two treatment groups were employed in this study with animals 
given silibinin in the diet at 0.05 and 0.1% (w/w). Monitoring of feed intake revealed that the mean dose in each 
group was 65 and 130 mg/kg per day, respectively. After 60 days, tumor volume was reduced by 35% and 58%, 
with tumor wet weights reduced by 29% and 40%, respectively. IGFBP-3 in plasma increased 4- and 5.8-fold, 
respectively, providing a pharmacodynamic confirmation of in vitro findings. Most important, however, were 
the plasma and tissue concentrations associated with these responses. Plasma levels of silibinin equivalents 
were 7 to 13 [micro]g/mL (15-27 [micro]M silibinin equivalents), and prostate concentrations were 3.7 to 4.6 
[micro]g/g tissue wet weight (6-10 [micro]moles silibinin equivalents/g wet weight). (32) Therefore, these 
preclinical studies guided the design of subsequent human pharmacokinetic studies in aiming to achieve plasma 
or tissue concentrations greater than 10 to 15 [micro]M silibinin equivalents. It was clear that dosing far in 
excess of conventional dietary supplement label indications would be required to obtain these levels.  
In more recent human studies, Hoh et al (24) tested somewhat higher conventional doses (up to 1.44 g/d) of 
silibinin-phosphatidylcholine (silipide; IdB 1016, Indena SpA) in 12 patients who were to undergo colorectal 
resection and another 12 who were to undergo liver surgery for hepatic metastases of colorectal cancer. The 
implicit but not stated rationale was that the high biliary concentrations observed in previous studies might be 
equally significant in liver and intestinal mucosa. Three oral dose levels (360, 720, and 1440 mg silibinin daily) 
were selected for 7 days prior to surgery, and blood levels of parent compound and metabolites were measured, 
as well as the concentrations in colorectal and hepatic tissue. Although analytical methods showed 2 
chromatographic peaks for silibinin, the authors unfortunately did not differentiate between silybin A and 
silybin B in their quantitative measurements. Mean plasma concentrations of 3 to 4 [micro]M were achieved in 
the highest dose group. In the liver group, hepatic tissue concentrations were quite variable and ranged from 1.0 
to 2.5 [micro]M across the dosage groups. Hence, older studies show that considerable enrichment of silibinin 
in the bile (29) is not associated with similar increases in hepatic parenchyma. Instead, the colorectal mucosal 
levels were dramatically higher than blood concentrations (141 [+ or -] 169 [micro]M at the highest dose level) 
but also quite variable. The investigators also examined pharmacodynamic endpoints including IGF-1, IGFBP-
3, and the lipid peroxidationgenerated DNA adduct, [M.sub.1]dG, but none of these were altered significantly 
during this 7-day trial.  
Pharmacokinetics of Milk Thistle Compounds--High-Dose Studies  
Flaig et al (25) recently provided the best evidence that silibinin can be administered to humans at doses 
producing anticancer-relevant concentrations with minimal or no side effects. This study employed the largest 
doses to date ranging from 2.5 to 20 g of silibinin-phosphatidylcholine (Indena's Siliphos brand 
"silybinphytosome") daily given in 3 divided doses for 4 weeks to 13 men with a history of prostate carcinoma 
(mean age of 70 years). To accommodate these large doses, Siliphos powder was mixed with apple sauce at a 
ratio of 1/4 teaspoon powder to 1 tablespoon apple sauce. A dose of 5 to 10 g/d was required to achieve mean 
peak plasma concentrations above 25 [micro]M silibinin equivalents. However, escalation to 15 to 20 g/d did 
not increase concentrations above 50 [micro]M silibinin equivalents and was discontinued due to asymptomatic 
hyperbilirubinemia, due most likely to inhibition of the glucuronyltransferase, UGT1A1. When the largest 
cohort of 6 patients was given a daily dose of 13 g/d, mean peak plasma concentrations of 75 [micro]M silibinin 
equivalents were obtained. Mild hyperbilirubinemia was still observed but improved with treatment cessation in 
all patients.  
The half-life of plasma silibinin ranged from 1.8 to 5 hours, consistent with previous studies, and there was 
extensive glucuronidation. Urinary free silibinin and conjugates were subject to a high degree of interpatient 
variability. Hence, a clear dose response was not discernible: mean silibinin in the urine was 6.4 [micro]M 
silibinin equivalents (range, undetectable to 28.2 [micro]M), and mean silibinin-glucuronide was 253 [micro]M 
silibinin equivalents (range, 1.5-982 [micro]M silibinin). Although the main objective of the trial was to 
recommend a dose for phase II trials, PSA was followed in all patients, but none exhibited greater than a 50% 
decrease in PSA levels. However, several patients exhibited prolonged stable disease.  
These data are the first to suggest that a milk thistle extract administered to human volunteers can be achieved 
in plasma at concentrations of silibinin equivalents consistent with inhibition of prostate carcinoma cell growth 
in culture. (25) However, these studies also point to a very important consideration if silibinin is to be used in 
the oncological setting. The authors report that the hyperbilirubinemia observed was due to inhibition of 
UGT1A1, whose [IC.sub.50] has been reported at 1.4 [micro]M silibinin equivalents. (33) Glucuronidation of 
the semisynthetic camptothecin derivative, irinotecan, is quite sensitive to UGT1A1 status, and patients with a 
UGT1A1 polymorphism that impairs activity are very sensitive to irinotecan toxicity. (34,35) A previous study 
indicated that milk thistle extracts do not influence irinotecan pharmacokinetics, but plasma silibinin 
equivalents achieved then were no greater than 0.26 [micro]M silibinin, below the [IC.sub.50] for UGT1A1 
inhibition. Therefore, high doses of silibinin (>13 g/d) should be used cautiously in patients with compromised 
hepatic function and should be contraindicated for concomitant administration with irinotecan.  
One Final Word About Hepatic Effects of Milk Thistle Extracts  
The potential for herb-drug interactions between milk thistle extracts and conventional pharmaceuticals appears 
to be quite low, (36) particularly at doses less than 1 to 5 g/d. However, it is recognized that several reports have 
appeared suggesting that silibinin or silymarin can inhibit some isoforms of the cytochrome P450 family, 
including CYP3A4 and CYP2C9. (33,37,38) In cancer therapeutics, these findings are important because 
several conventional chemotherapeutic drugs are also metabolized by CYP3A4, raising some concerns 
regarding other milk thistle-drug interactions in oncology or other settings. Inhibition of purified enzymes was 
somewhat substrate selective, with [K.sub.i] values for silibinin equivalents of 32 to 166 [micro]M for CYP3A4 
and 5 [micro]M for CYP2C9. (33) In cultured human hepatocytes, CYP3A4 activity was inhibited by 50% at 
100 [micro]M and 100% at 250 [micro]M silymarin, concentrations that are quite high and difficult to relate to 
silibinin equivalents. (38) It bears noting that Gurley et al (36) reported that silibinin administration to human 
volunteers had no effect on model substrate metabolism by any of the 4 CYP isoforms his group measured, 
including CYP3A4; however, the dose used likely would not have produced plasma concentrations greater than 
1 [micro]M silibinin equivalents.  
There are several reasons to note the potential for CYP inhibition by milk thistle extracts as clinical efficacy 
trials might move forward. First is that plasma concentrations of silibinin equivalents at an oral dose of 13 g/d 
(25) may begin to approach concentrations for CYP inhibition. Second is that Sridar et al (33) noted that in vitro 
enzyme inhibition was "mechanism-based," meaning that inhibited P450 activities could not be restored by 
dialysis of silibinin and that inhibition may have resulted from a reactive metabolic intermediate that bound 
covalently to the heme moiety of the enzymes. This irreversible type of inhibition would pose a potentially 
more serious drug interaction risk if it were to occur in human hepatocytes or, obviously, human volunteers. 
However, there is no information at this point to suggest that P450 inhibition occurs in patients, and there has 
yet to be a conclusive demonstration of a covalent silibinin-P450 heme adduct in any in vitro study. In fact, 
there has yet to be a systematic dissection of cytochrome P450 inhibition by any of the single, pure 
flavonolignans. Hence, even if clinically relevant P450 inhibition were observed, it may only be restricted to 
individual flavonolignans. In this theoretical case, offending compounds could be separated from those that 
retain anticancer activity.  
In the meantime, clinicians should be aware that high doses of milk thistle extracts, perhaps greater than 5 g/d, 
may have the potential to inhibit the metabolism of other drugs that are substrates for CYP3A4 or CYP2C9. 
Investigators conducting future high-dose studies may also wish to consider investigating the disposition of 
CYP model substrates to address this important question, particularly since there is a growing appreciation for 
the potential metabolic interactions between drugs and dietary substances. (13)  
Conclusions  
The primary intent of this review article has been to make a strong case for accuracy in the description of milk 
thistle study materials used in in vitro, in vivo, and clinical studies. The argument has been made that attention 
to proper nomenclature is not germane only to chemistry but rather is essential to the further progress of milk 
thistle studies in the preclinical and clinical experimental therapeutics of cancer. Without attention to this 
important detail, comparisons between studies are fraught with errors. The authors recognize that FDA 
regulations for approval of a botanical investigational new drug application will likely dictate that milk thistle 
extracts, rather than pure compounds, will continue to move forward in clinical trials. Therefore, it is essential 
that all involved in basic and translational cancer research recognize the chemical complexity of the botanical 
extracts being tested and that greater attention be paid to the pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic 
characteristics of the pure compounds that comprise these promising therapeutic mixtures.  
Acknowledgments  
The authors wish to recognize the support of research and training grants from the US National Institutes of 
Health that have supported the activities associated with this review article: R01 CA100721 and R01 CA104286 
(to DJK) and K08 AT001215 (to HSS). The authors also express gratitude to Tyler N. Graf, MS, for his 
outstanding technical assistance in isolating the pure flavonolignans discussed in this review and to Yuka 
Nakanishi, PhD, and Aglaia Pappa, PhD, for their pharmacological investigations.  
References  
1. Ladas E, Kroll DJ, Kelly KA. Milk thistle (Silybum marianum). In: Coates PM, Blackman MR, Cragg GM, 
Levine M, Moss J, White JD, eds. Encyclopedia of Dietary Supplements. New York: Marcel Dekker; 2005:467-
482.  
2. Agarwal R, Katiyar SK, Lundgren DW, Mukhtar H. Inhibitory effect of silymarin, an anti-hepatotoxic 
flavonoid, on 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol- 13-acetate-induced epidermal ornithine decarboxylase activity and 
mRNA in SENCAR mice. Carcinogenesis. 1994;15:1099-1103.  
3. Lahiri-Chatterjee M, Katiyar SK, Mohan RR, Agarwal R. A flavonoid antioxidant, silymarin, affords 
exceptionally high protection against tumor promotion in the SENCAR mouse skin tumorigenesis model. 
Cancer Res. 1999;59:622-632.  
4. Deep G, Agarwal R. Integr Cancer Ther. 2007;6:130-145.  
5. Simanek V, Kren V, Ulrichova J, Vicar J, Cvak L. Silymarin: what is in the name ...? An appeal for a change 
of editorial policy. Hepatology. 2000;32:442-444.  
6. Kim NC, Graf TN, Sparacino CM, Wani MC, Wall ME. Complete isolation and characterization of silybins 
and isosilybins from milk thistle (Silybum marianum). Org Biomol Chem. 2003;1:1684-1689.  
7. Wagner H, Horhammer L, Munster R. On the chemistry of silymarin (silybin), the active principle of the 
fruits from Silybum marianum (L.) Gaertn. (Carduus marianus L.) [in German]. Arzneimittelforschung. 
1968;18:688-696.  
8. Wagner H, Diesel P, Seitz M. The chemistry and analysis of silymarin from Silybum marianum Gaertn [in 
German]. Arzneimittelforschung. 1974;24:466-471.  
9. Lee DY, Liu Y. Molecular structure and stereochemistry of silybin A, silybin B, isosilybin A, and isosilybin 
B, Isolated from Silybum marianum (milk thistle). J Nat Prod. 2003;66:1171-114.  
10. Duan L, Carrier DJ, Clausen EC. Silymarin extraction from milk thistle using hot water. Appl Biochem 
Biotechnol. 2004;113-116:559-568.  
11. Wallace SN, Carrier DJ, Clausen EC. Batch solvent extraction of flavanolignans from milk thistle (Silybum 
marianum L. Gaertner). Phytochem Anal. 2005;16:7-16.  
12. Davis-Searles PR, Nakanishi Y, Kim NC, et al. Milk thistle and prostate cancer: differential effects of pure 
flavonolignans from Silybum marianum on antiproliferative end points in human prostate carcinoma cells. 
Cancer Res. 2005;65:4448-4457.  
13. Paine MF, Oberlies NH. Clinical relevance of the small intestine as an organ of drug elimination: drug-fruit 
juice interactions. Expert Opin Drug Metab Toxicol. 2007;3:67-80.  
14. Seidlova-Wuttke D, Becker T, Christoffel V, Jarry H, Wuttke W. Silymarin is a selective estrogen receptor 
beta (ERbeta) agonist and has estrogenic effects in the metaphysis of the femur but no or antiestrogenic effects 
in the uterus of ovariectomized (ovx) rats. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2003;86:179-188.  
15. An J, Tzagarakis-Foster C, Scharschmidt TC, Lomri N, Leitman DC. Estrogen receptor beta-selective 
transcriptional activity and recruitment of coregulators by phytoestrogens. J Biol Chem. 2001;276:17808-
17814.  
16. Paruthiyil S, Parmar H, Kerekatte V, Cunha GR, Firestone GL, Leitman DC. Estrogen receptor beta inhibits 
human breast cancer cell proliferation and tumor formation by causing a G2 cell cycle arrest. Cancer Res. 
2004;64:423-428.  
17. Strom A, Hartman J, Foster JS, Kietz S, Wimalasena J, Gustafsson JA. Estrogen receptor beta inhibits 
17beta-estradiol-stimulated proliferation of the breast cancer cell line T47D. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2004;101:1566-1571.  
18. Hartman J, Lindberg K, Morani A, Inzunza J, Strom A, Gustafsson JA. Estrogen receptor beta inhibits 
angiogenesis and growth of T47D breast cancer xenografts. Cancer Res. 2006;66:11207-11213.  
19. Pliskova M, Vondracek J, Kren V, et al. Effects of silymarin flavonolignans and synthetic silybin 
derivatives on estrogen and aryl hydrocarbon receptor activation. Toxicology. 2005;215:80-89.  
20. Dvorak Z, Kosina P, Walterova D, Simanek V, Bachleda P, Ulrichova J. Primary cultures of human 
hepatocytes as a tool in cytotoxicity studies: cell protection against model toxins by flavonolignans obtained 
from Silybum marianum. Toxicol Lett. 2003;137:201-212.  
21. Schulz HU, Schurer M, Krumbiegel G, Wachter W, Weyhenmeyer R, Seidel G. The solubility and 
bioequivalence of silymarin preparations [in German]. Arzneimittelforschung. 1995;45:61-64.  
22. Han YH, Lou HX, Ren DM, Sun LR, Ma B, Ji M. Stereoselective metabolism of silybin diastereoisomers in 
the glucuronidation process. J Pharm Biomed Anal. 2004;34:1071-1078.  
23. Lee JI, Hsu BH, Wu D, Barrett JS. Separation and characterization of silybin, isosilybin, silydianin and 
silychristin in milk thistle extract by liquid chromatography-electrospray tandem mass spectrometry. J 
Chromatogr A. 2006;1116:57-68.  
24. Hoh C, Boocock D, Marczylo T, et al. Pilot study of oral silibinin, a putative chemopreventive agent, in 
colorectal cancer patients: silibinin levels in plasma, colorectum, and liver and their pharmacodynamic 
consequences. Clin Cancer Res. 2006;12:2944-2950.  
25. Flaig TW, Gustafson DL, Su LJ, et al. A phase I and pharmacokinetic study of silybin-phytosome in 
prostate cancer patients. Invest New Drugs. 2007;25:139-146.  
26. Kroll DJ, Oberlies NH. The impact of newly proposed dietary supplement manufacturing guidelines on 
patient safety and clinical trials outcomes. Focus Altern Complement Ther. 2003;8:302-306.  
27. Barzaghi N, Crema F, Gatti G, Pifferi G, Perucca E. Pharmacokinetic studies on IdB 1016, a silybin-
phosphatidylcholine complex, in healthy human subjects. Eur J Drug Metab Pharmacokinet. 1990;15:333-338.  
28. Weyhenmeyer R, Mascher H, Birkmayer J. Study on doselinearity of the pharmacokinetics of silibinin 
diastereomers using a new stereospecific assay. Int J Clin Pharmacol Ther Toxicol. 1992;30:134-138.  
29. Schandalik R, Gatti G, Perucca E. Pharmacokinetics of silybin in bile following administration of silipide 
and silymarin in cholecystectomy patients. Arzneimittelforschung. 1992;42:964-968.  
30. Zi X, Zhang J, Agarwal R, Pollak M. Silibinin up-regulates insulin-like growth factor-binding protein 3 
expression and inhibits proliferation of androgen-independent prostate cancer cells. Cancer Res. 2000;60:5617-
5620.  
31. Tyagi AK, Singh RP, Agarwal C, Chan DC, Agarwal R. Silibinin strongly synergizes human prostate 
carcinoma DU145 cells to doxorubicin-induced growth Inhibition, G2-M arrest, and apoptosis. Clin Cancer 
Res. 2002;8:3512-3519.  
32. Singh RP, Dhanalakshmi S, Tyagi AK, Chan DC, Agarwal C, Agarwal R. Dietary feeding of silibinin 
inhibits advance human prostate carcinoma growth in athymic nude mice and increases plasma insulin-like 
growth factor-binding protein-3 levels. Cancer Res. 2002;62:3063-3069.  
33. Sridar C, Goosen TC, Kent UM, Williams JA, Hollenberg PF. Silybin inactivates cytochromes P450 3A4 
and 2C9 and inhibits major hepatic glucuronosyltransferases. Drug Metab Dispos. 2004;32:587-594.  
34. Ando Y, Saka H, Ando M, et al. Polymorphisms of UDP-glucuronosyltransferase gene and irinotecan 
toxicity: a pharmacogenetic analysis. Cancer Res. 2000;60:6921-6926.  
35. Ando Y, Saka H, Asai G, Sugiura S, Shimokata K, Kamataki T. UGT1A1 genotypes and glucuronidation of 
SN-38, the active metabolite of irinotecan. Ann Oncol. 1998;9:845-847.  
36. Gurley BJ, Gardner SF, Hubbard MA, et al. In vivo assessment of botanical supplementation on human 
cytochrome P450 phenotypes: Citrus aurantium, Echinacea purpurea, milk thistle, and saw palmetto. Clin 
Pharmacol Ther. 2004;76:428-440.  
37. Beckmann-Knopp S, Rietbrock S, Weyhenmeyer R, et al. Inhibitory effects of silibinin on cytochrome P-
450 enzymes in human liver microsomes. Pharmacol Toxicol. 2000;86:250-256.  
38. Venkataramanan R, Ramachandran V, Komoroski BJ, Zhang S, Schiff PL, Strom SC. Milk thistle, a herbal 
supplement, decreases the activity of CYP3A4 and uridine diphosphoglucuronosyl transferase in human 
hepatocyte cultures. Drug Metab Dispos. 2000;28:1270-1273.  
David J. Kroll, PhD, Heather S. Shaw, MD, and Nicholas H. Oberlies, PhD  
DJK and NHO are at the Natural Products Laboratory, Research Triangle Institute (RTI), Research Triangle 
Park, NC. HSS is at the Division of Medical Oncology and Program in Integrative Oncology, Duke University 
Medical Center and Duke Comprehensive Cancer Center, Durham, NC.  
Correspondence: David J. Kroll, PhD, Research Triangle Institute (RTI), 3040 Cornwallis Rd, PO Box 12194, 
Research Triangle Park, NC 27709-2194. E-mail: kroll@rti.org.  
 
Table 1. Quick Reference Glossary of Milk Thistle Nomenclature 
  
Milk thistle extract  The initial extract of crushed milk thistle seeds, 
                        usually with ethanol, that contains 65% to 80% 
                        silymarin and 20% to 35% fatty acids, such as 
                        linoleic acid. 
Silymarin             A complex of at least 7 flavonolignans and 1 
                        flavonoid that comprises 65% to 80% of milk 
                        thistle extract. 
Silibinin             A semipurified, commercially available fraction of 
                        silymarin. Silibinin was once thought to be a 
                        single compound and is often treated so in the 
                        literature. In fact, silibinin is a roughly 1:1 
                        mixture of 2 diastereoisomeric compounds, 
                        silybin A and silybin B. 
Isosilibinin          Similar to silibinin, this semipurified fraction 
                        of silymarin contains a roughly 1:1 mixture of 2 
                        diastereoisomeric compounds, isosilybin A and 
                        isosilybin B. Isosilibinin is currently under 
                        evaluation as a more potent alternative to 
                        silibinin that may be produced more economically 
                        than either pure compound. 
Flavonolignan         The most common class of compound present in milk 
                        thistle extract. Milk thistle flavonolignans 
                        result from a peroxidase reaction in the plant 
                        that fuses the flavonoid, taxifolin (known also 
                        as dihydroquercetin), with coniferyl alcohol, 
                        resulting in at least 7 compounds that all share 
                        the formula weight of 482.1. 
 
