NUCLEAR DID: ISION IN TRADESCANTIA VIRGINIANA
BEATRICE LEHMAN AND F. -M. ANDREWS
Introduction
The study of Tradescantia virginiana L. as reported in this paper is pos-
sible only during its period of anthesis. This lasts, in this region, from
about May to October, varying somewhat with the season. The blooming
period in this plant may, however, be somewhat extended by employing
suitable cultural and cutting methods. Even under the most favorable con-
ditions, the period during which it is possible to study the behavior of the
nucleus in the cells of the hairs on the staminal filaments is a comparatively
short part of the year.
Tradescantia virginiana has been an object of study for many years. A
brief summary of this study has recently been given by KiUSTER (2). Al-
though many problems have been solved by work on Tradescantia virgini-
ana, still others remain for investigation. Among these may be mentioned:
(1) The possible occurrence of intercalary division in the staminal hairs;
(2) the position of granules on the protoplasmic strands in the cells of the
staminal hairs; (3) chromosome kinetics; (4) BECKER'S (1) oxidation proc-
esses and nuclear division; (5) the effect of chemicals on nuclear division,
etc.; and (6) questions of diapedesis. TELEZYNSKI'S statement that the
cells of the staminal hairs remained living for eight days in paraffin oil also
certainly merits further investigation.
The following points have been investigated and briefly recorded in this
study of nuclear division in Tradescantia virginiana, namely, the effects of
temperature, carbon dioxide, ether, chloroform, iodine, and fluoreseeini. In
some eases the effects on the protoplasm of Elodea canadensis has been men-
tioned for the sake of comparison.
Experimentation
EFFECTS OF TEMPERATURE ON NUCLEAR DIVISION
The lower temperatures employed in this work were regulated by the
use of a MOLISCH freezing box containing dry ice, and the medium and
higher temperatures were regulated by using a thermostat, or a heating
stage, according to requirements. Table I presents the average results ob-
tained with ten specimens studied for each of the different temperatures
recorded. Reading downward the figures in each column of the table indi-
cate the time required for each stage in the nuclear division, and the total
time for the nuclear division at the given temperature is recorded at the
foot of each column. No divisions occurred at 180 C. The various "stages"
845
 www.plantphysiol.orgon January 11, 2020 - Published by Downloaded from 
Copyright © 1934 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.
PLANT PHYSIOLOGY
here recorded are the same stages of nuclear division as were figured by
STRASBURGER (3).
Table I shows that a temperature of 28° C. was tl;e most favorable, in
the stages mentioned, causingf nuclear division in 69 minutes, which is 11
minutes less than the total time of the stages recorded by STRASBURGER.
Even at 27.5° C. the nucleus divided somewhat more slowly (taking a min-
utes longer, on the average) than indicated by STRASBURGER'S stages. A
very interesting variability is showvn in the length of time required for com-
pletion of nuclear division, beginning with no division at all at 180 C. and
rising abruptly to 340 minutes at 190 C. With inereasing temperature the
time required decreases to 69 miniutes at 28° C., which was the optimunm
averaae temperature for the specimens studied. Above 28° C. the nu,clear
divisions proceeded more and more slowly until at 400 C. 330 minutes w-ere
required, almost the same period of time as was required at 19° C. Above
40° C. no divisions occurred.
When the temperature is raised or lowNvered gradually the division of the
nucleus is not so noticeably affected as when there is a sudden rise or fall.
If the cell is heated to 350 C. suddenly the division is slow or ceases entirely.
When the temperature of the oven which was 29° C. was raised in 15
minutes to 38.5° C. nuclear division took place slowly. When heated to
410 C. the nucleus did not divide nor did it recover if it had begun to divide.
At a temperature of 18° C. or below, no division occurred, nor was there
apparenit recovery. It was found that the protoplasm of Tradescantia vir-
giniana can remain active at a temperature higher than that which will
allow nuclear division. If the temperature has not been too high nor too
low, the protoplasm will resume movement after a return to niormal con-
ditions.
EFFECTS OF CARBON DIOXIDE
A few observations were made to determine the effects which CO, has
upon nuclear division of Tradescantia. We have measured, first, the length
of time required to stop nuclear division; second, the length of time CO2
can be permitted to act and the nucleus still recover and continue division;
and third, the length of time required to kill the nucleus with CO.,.
Carbon dioxide was applied for periods of 20, 10, 5, and 1 minute, and
30, 15, and 10 seconds to different cells whose nuclei were in the process of
division. In each case pure moist fresh air at the proper temperature was
drawn over the specimens containilng the dividing nuclei for 30 to 60 min-
utes after the application of the CO,. On the average the nuclear division
stopped almost instantly on the application of pure CO, or within 2 to 4
seconds, which simply indicates the length of time necessary for the CO., to
penetrate the cell wall and protoplasm and to reach the nucleus. In treated
cells with dividing nuclei, the nuclei failed to recover, except where the CO2
was applied to the dividing nucleus of the staminal hairs for onlv 10 sec-
846
 www.plantphysiol.orgon January 11, 2020 - Published by Downloaded from 
Copyright © 1934 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.
LEHMAN AND ANDREWS: NUCLEAR DIVISION
*D oTt 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
*DoO0V C m I jct
*)o-£ co m CA cvl cM e: t:' in C*D o 0 0 0 0 0 010
ci
o o 0 0 0 0 0 010
O ri C- ClOOCCOO O
CD 0 LC-. LC~ LC ULC C~
*9 o6l'lC i
*D *9 0o 0o i I': ir 0_ 0 0 c
og)o6 E r--i r-cr-l cli o
Cli CA L- I- t- Ci Cri-09C cli
*9 o9- H H Ci Ci O
'-I
0 0a Ci Ci Q )0 0
*Do ri - - - Ci C r
0 0 c C1 M. 0 0o
UIC VC '~'--i 1C LO In
*C)oT6 Ci Ci H ~ CA Cs 0
00oo 0 I C 0
C>
0 0 0 0 0 00 010J*9 o C 66 CD Ci C1 C >t
*9o81 ~ ~ __0 0 0 0
*ri
-
-q
cI
0
847
0o
0$
zI
z
CO
zt
zr
 www.plantphysiol.orgon January 11, 2020 - Published by Downloaded from 
Copyright © 1934 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.
PLANT PHYSIOLOGY
onds. In this case, recovery was apparent in 10 minutes after fresh moist
air was drawn over the cell. The nucleus was killed by an application of
pure CO2 for 15 seconds.
After an application of CO2 for 10 minutes, the protoplasm of the young
leaf of Elodea recovered in 3 minutes; but after an application of CO2 for
30 minutes there was no recovery of the protoplasm in the cells of the young
leaf of this plant, even after fresh moist air was drawn over the specimen
for 25 minutes.
EFFECTS OF ETHER
The effect of ether upon the protoplasm and the nuclear division of the
staminal hairs of Tradescantia and upon the protoplasm of the leaf of
Elodea was ascertained by the following experiments.
The vapor from a saturated solution of ether in distilled water w-as
drawn over a cell of Tradescantia virginiana containing a dividing nucleus;
it continued to divide for 5 to 7 minutes and then stopped. When fresb
moist air was then drawn over the specimens they recovered in 15 minutes.
After the application of ether vapor for 30 minutes, the nucleus of a
cell of Tradescantia which had stopped dividing recovered under the influ-
ence of fresh moist air in 20 minutes. It is obvious that ether vapor is less
destructive to the nuclear division of plants than CO2.
A cell of Tradescantia with a dividing nucleus was placed for 15 minutes
over strong ether in a ring cell on a slide; 30 minutes were required for re-
covery after this treatment, although in some cases even a 5- to 10-minute
exposure was sufficient to kill such a dividing cell under these conditions.
Elodea frequently recovered immediately after having been treated with
strong ether vapor by the ring-cell method for 15 minutes. On the other
hand, as much as 1 hour or more was often required to kill the cell when
thus subjected to strong ether vapor.
When the hairs from a staminal filament of Tradescantia showing
nuclear divisions, and a leaf of Elodea, both of which showed active proto-
plasmic movement at the beginning, were placed side by side in a saturated
solution of ether water in amounts sufficient to cover them, the nuclear
division in Tradescantia was stopped in 30 seconds and the movement of the
protoplasm of Elodea in 2 minutes. No recovery occurred in either case.
Ether is especially harmful to nuclear division and protoplasmic movement
when in direct contact with the cells. The vapors, however, are not so
harmful, and the cells may even recover some time after its application.
EFFECTS OF CHLOROFORM
When a current of air was drawn through distilled water saturated with
chloroform all nuclear divisions in the staminal hairs of Tradescantia were
stopped in 60 seconds and there was no recovery. Actively moving proto-
plasm in the cells of the leaves of Elodea was stopped in 5 minutes after
848
 www.plantphysiol.orgon January 11, 2020 - Published by Downloaded from 
Copyright © 1934 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.
LEHMAN AND ANDREWS: NUCLEAR DIVISION
the chloroform vapor was admitted; and even after 15 minutes, the use of
fresh moist air failed to bring about its recovery.
One-minute submergence in water saturated with chloroform was suffi-
cient to kill the protoplasm of Elodea; and nuclear division in Tradescantia
was stopped instantly when the cells were submerged in strong chloroform
water.
EFFECTS OF IODINE
The effects of iodine upon the nuclear division of cells of staminal hairs
of Tradescantia and on the protoplasmic movement of the cells of Elodea
were investigated.
The vapor from a 5 per cent. solution of iodine was drawn over speci-
mens of Tradescantia and Elodea for 30 minutes. The vapor had no effect
on either, even in 1.5 hours. When, however, specimens of Tradescantia
and Elodea were placed directly in a 5 per cent. solution of iodine, the cells
were immediately stained brown, nuclear division and protoplasmic move-
ment stopped at once, and the cells could not be made to recover. Twelve
parts of 5 per cent. iodine solution in 500 parts of water stopped division,
and the cells were stained deep yellow at once. The same strength of iodine
acting on protoplasm of Elodea caused rapid decrease in its movement, and
after 20 minutes it was completely stopped. No recovery occurred. One
cc. of 5 per cent. iodine in 1 cc. of distilled water stopped the protoplasmic
movement instantly and no recovery took place.
Specimens of Tradescantia with dividing nuclei and leaves of Elodea
with actively moving protoplasm were placed on a glass ring cell containing
a saturated aqueous solution of iodine. This stopped the division and ap-
parently killed the nucleus almost at once. The protoplasm of leaf cells of
Elodea stopped moving in 5 minutes and did not recover.
EFFECTS OF FLUORESCEIN
A beautiful green solution of fluorescein was obtained by placing sev-
eral grains of fluorescein in distilled water. The dividing nuclei of staminal
hairs of Tradescantia, mounted in this solution, were stained yellow within
5 to 10 minutes. The dye had no effect on the nuclear division and all of
the various stages could be readily followed.
INDIANA UNIVERSITY
BLOOMINGTON, INDIANA
LITERATURE CITED
1. BECKER, W. A. Vitalbeobachtungen fiber den Einfluss von Methylen-
blau und Neutralrot auf den Verlauf von Karyo- and Kytokinese.
Cytologia 4: 135-157. 1929-1933.
2. KUSTER, ERNST. Hundert Jahre Tradescantia. pp. 1-32. 1933.
3. STRASBURGER, E. Handbook of practical botany. 7th ed. p. 436.
Translated by W. HILLHOUSE.
849
 www.plantphysiol.orgon January 11, 2020 - Published by Downloaded from 
Copyright © 1934 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.
