Journul of Natural Products 
Vol. 48, No. 5 ,  pp.  725-738, Sep-Oct 1985 
725 
BENZYLISOQUINOLINE BIOSYNTHESIS BY CULTIVATED 
PLANT CELLS AND ISOLATED ENZYMES. 
MEINHART H. ZENK+, MARTINA RUEFFER, MANFRED AMANN, BRIGITTE DEUS-NEUMANN, 
Lhrsruhl fur Phatmuzeutische Biologie, Universitat Munchen, Karlstrasse 29, 0-8000 Munchen 2, West Germany 
and NAOTAKA NAGAKURA 
Kobe Women’s College of Pharmacy. Kobe 658, Japan 
ABSTRACT.-Plant cell cultures rather than differentiated plants are the preferred mate- 
rial for studying secondary product formation and elucidate the enzyme pathways responsible 
for isoquinoline alkaloid formation. Using callus and cell suspension cultures of different Bw- 
beriJ species, we studied the incorporation ofearly precursors like tyrosine, dopa, tyramine, and 
dopamine into jatrorrhizine. Besides tyrosine, tyramine and, to a lesser extent, dopamine were 
incorporated into the aldehyde precursor moiety of the isoquinoline molecule. The use of cell- 
free extracts of Berberis cultures has allowed us to isolate and characterize all of the eight enzymes 
involved in berberine biosynthesis. (S)-Tetrahydroprotoberberine oxidase was successfully im- 
mobilized and could be used for the quantitative conversion of (S)-tetrahydroprotoberberines 
through their dehydroderivatives and their racemic reduction products into the pure (R)-enan- 
tiomer. This latter enzyme and the berberine bridge enzyme are localized exclusively in a new 
vesicle with the density 6 = 1.14; all six other enzymes of the pathway are cytoplasmic. Using 
highly labeled (R)- and (S)-reticuline as well as scoulerine, it could be demonstrated that the 
transport of these compounds into vacuoles of Fumaria capreolata does not proceed by an ion-trap 
mechanism, but rather involves an active ATP-requiring, stereospecific carrier system acting 
only on the (S)- and not on the @?)-enantiomer. 
The benzylisoquinoline alkaloid series shows an unusually rich variety of structural 
types ( 1,2). Many useful biogenetic schemes have been suggested (summarized in 3 )  to 
account for the biosynthesis of these molecules. Remarkable progress was made in the 
1960s and 1970s in elucidating these pathways using living differentiated whole plants 
and various precursor molecules labeled with radioactive or stable isotopes. However, 
as was pointed out already by I.D. Spenser as early as 1968 (4 ) ,  more reliable informa- 
tion on the actual biosynthetic sequences can only be obtained by in-vitro work with the 
purified enzymes of biosynthesis. Tracer work only suggests probable biosynthetic se- 
quences; the ultimate proof, however, can only be given by the isolation and character- 
ization of the respective catalysts. In addition, more information has to be sought and 
gained on the compartmentation of enzymes involved in the biosynthetic chain leading 
to secondary plant products and on the mechanisms by which these products and their 
precursors are transported and stored. Because of the structural diversity expressed in 
the benzylisoquinoline group, and due to the pharmaceutical value that some of its 
members (e.g., codeine, berberine, galanthamine, hydrastine, morphine, narcotine, 
tetrandrine, a-tubocurarine) represent, biosynthetic work on these compounds is jus- 
tified in addition to its heuristic value. 
CELL CULTURES.Xel1 suspension as well as callus cultures of several species of the 
families Berberidaceae, Ranunculaceae, Menispermaceae, Papaveraceae, and 
Fumariaceae produce isoquinoline alkaloids in substantial amounts (5). The most di- 
verse isoquinoline alkaloid spectrum for a cell suspension culture thus far published has 
been found to occur in Fumaria capreolata (6). The structural types of benzylisoquinoline 
alkaloids found in cell cultures indicating also their biogenetic relationship are shown 
‘Presented as a plenary lecture at the “Biologically Active Nitrogen-Containing Natural Products: 
Structure, Biosynthesis, and Synthesis” Symposium of the International Research Congress on Natural 
Products at the University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, July 7-12, 1985. 
726 Journal of Natural Products [Vol. 48, No. 5 
in Figure 1. All of these structures have been isolated and identified in callus and/or sus- 
pension cultures except for cularine- and pavine-type alkaloids, which have not yet been 
found to occur in undifferentiated plants. Plant cell cultures capable of producing the 
desired alkaloids are excellent sources of enzyme systems (7). Cells can be grown under 
exactly defined conditions on a large scale, thus providing any desired amount of 
homogeneous plant material as an enzyme source independent of seasons. As a rule, 
levels of enzyme activity are considerably higher in suspension cells as compared with 
whole plants because the time required for product synthesis under cell culture condi- 
tions is much shorter than in field-grown plants. In differentiated plants, stationary 
levels of enzymes involved in secondary metabolism seem to be very low in general. The 
high content of phenolics and other undesirable cell constituents tends to inactivate en- 
zymes during the isolation procedure. By using plant cell cultures, however, it has been 
possible to gain a deeper insight into the cell-free biosynthesis of benzylisoquinoline al- 
kaloids (7,8). 
Maphinandionow / Benzylisoquinolim Aporphine 
Pavine Benrophemthridino Protobutmino RDtopinc 
FIGURE 1. Structural types of benzylisoquinoline alkaloids found in 
plant cell cultures indicating also their biogenetic relation- 
ship. Cularine and pavine type alkaloids have not been de- 
tected so far in cell cultures. 
THE DISTANT PRECURSORS.-AS early as 1910, Winterstein and Trier (9) 
suggested that two molecules of 3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine (DOPA) might be mod- 
ified in the plant to yield dopamine and 3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetaldehyde, which in 
turn could condense and yield norlaudanosoline, recognized already at that time as a 
potential precursor for more complex isoquinoline alkaloids. Gear and Spenser (10) 
were the first to observe that singly-labeled tyrosine (a known precursor of DOPA) can 
serve as a specific precursor of hydrastine and that the two units forming this benzyl- 
isoquinoline alkaloid bear labels to a different extent. Further work, (4)  established 
beyond doubt that tyrosine contributes to the upper (isoquinoline) as well as to the 
lower (benzyl) portion of these alkaloids, whereas DOPA, formed from tyrosine, is 
exclusively incorporated into the isoquinoline moiety (Figure 2). The nature of the true 
precursors during the formation of the benzylisoquinoline system has not been fully 
Sep-Oct 19851 Zenk et af. : Benzylisoquinoline Biosynthesis 727 
H U Hoocm "upper" HO portion isoquinoline . / 
L-Tyrosine \ 4__ / L-DOPA 
"lower" 
benzyl 
Ho P " 2  portion 
Tyramine Dopamine 
FIGURE 2. Incorporation experiments described in the literature (4) 
using "C-labeled potential precursors resulting in differ- 
ent labeling of the upper, isquinoline, and the lower, 
benzyl, portion of benzylisquinoline alkaloids. 
established yet (1 1). 3,4-Dihydroxyphenylpyruvic acid, which has been postulated as 
an intermediate in benzylisoquinoline biosynthesis through the formation of nor- 
laudanosoline- 1-carboxylic acid (12), has been ruled out by enzyme work (13). It is 
quite certain that dopamine is the precursor of the upper (isoquinoline) portion of these 
alkaloids. It is formed from tyrosine via DOPA and subsequent decarboxylation (Figure 
3). 
The question remains how the precursor of the benzylic portion of nor- 
laudanosoline, now known to be 3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetaldehyde ( 13), is formed. 
00- 
Chorismate - -m Lco2 
!-!€I 
&Hydroxy phenylpyruvate \ - bclaurine 
derived 
Alkaloids 
HO fi-/ Ho 
L-Tyrosine pN 2 ~ - H y d r o x y p h o n y l a c e ( a l d o h y d l  
H 
L-DOPA 
Tyramine I 
' O m o  - R;;;;;e 
Alkaloids 
Dopamine \ 
H o ~ m < 3 & ~ i  o hydroxyp heny lacetaldehyde 
3.4 Dihydroxyphenylpyruvate 
FIGURE 3. Biosynthetic sequence leading from a primary metabolite (tyrosine) to the building blocks of 
the benzylisoquinoline alkaloids: dopamine, 3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetaIdehyde, and 4-hy- 
droxyphenylacetaldehyde. 
728 Journal of Natural Products IVol. 48, No. 5 
Three possibilities are shown in Figure 3 .  4-Hydroxyphenylacetaldehyde is formed 
either by decarboxylation of 4-hydroxyphenylpyruvate or by action of a monoamine 
oxidase on tyramine, and can then be hydroxylated by action of a phenolase to yield the 
dihydroxy precursor. The two other possibilities comprise the deamination of 
dopamine or the decarboxylation of 3,4-dihydroxyphenylpyruvate by a plant enzyme to 
yield the dihydroxylated aldehyde. To investigate these possibilities, all four potential 
precursors labeled in the 1 '-position were administered to rapidly growing callus cul- 
tures of Berberis canadensis. Jatrorrhizine, the major alkaloid of this species (14), was iso- 
lated, methylated to palmatine, and subsequently subjected to permanganate oxidation 
( 15) yielding the upper and lower halves of the protoberberine molecule. Incorporation 
and degradation data are summarized in Table 1. 
TABLE 1. Incorporation of Potential Precursors into Jatrorrhizine by 
Callus Cultures of Berberis canadensis 
portion of jatrorrhizine" 
(% of label) 
Precursor fed 
85.5 14.5 
"The protoberberine molecule was methylated and cleaved into 
the upper isoquinoline and the lower benzyl portion, and the distribu- 
tion of radioactivity was determined. 
The incorporation of all four precursors into the protoberberine was between 25 and 
35 percent. The incorporation of tyrosine into both halves of the protoberberine follows 
the classical pattern established earlier (4). The incorporation of tyramine into both 
halves of the protoberberine molecule, however, demonstrates beyond doubt that the 
suggested condensation of dopamine and 3,4-dihydroxyphenylpyruvate affording the 
intermediate norlaudanosoline- 1-carboxylic acid ( 12) is not an important pathway, if it 
occurs at all. Surprisingly, dopamine is also incorporated to an extent of 14 percent into 
the lower portion of the protoberberine molecule, while DOPA itself is almost exclu- 
sively incorporated into the upper isoquinoline portion of the target molecule, confirm- 
ing the well-established biosynthetic scheme (e.g., 4). 
For the interpretation of these results, it is important to realize that large pools of 
dopamine have been discovered to occur in Papaversomniferum, which are, in addition, 
compartmentalized in different cellular and subcellular loci (16). This dopamine pool 
could lead to an enormous dilution of the labeled precursor administered, resulting in a 
low absolute incorporation. Furthermore, any monoamine oxidase acting on this 
dopamine pool to yield the required C&, precursor would further reduce the labeling 
of the benzyl (lower) unit of morphinan alkaloids. In contrast, only a small dopamine 
pool has been observed in B .  canadensis callus, which might explain the results obtained 
in the DOPA and dopamine feeding (and degradation) experiments (Table 1; Figure 4). 
Both dihydroxylated precursors, in contrast to other feeding experiments-xpertly 
discussed by Holland, et a / .  ( l l f i label  both halves of the benzylisoquinoline 
molecule, although to an unequal extent. Tyramine, whose incorporation into the 
isoquinoline as well as the benzyl portion of a protoberberine alkaloid, has been ob- 
Sep-Oct 19851 Zenk et a / .  : Benzylisoquinoline Biosynthesis 7 29 
HO HO p”2 
upper: 75% 
lower: 25% 
upper : 50% \ 
lower: 50% 
HO ti0 
upper: 100% upper: 85V0 
Lower: 0 lower: 15% 
FIGURE 4. Incorporation of I4C-labeled potential precursors into the 
isoquinoline “upper” and the benzyl “lower” portion of 
the protoberberine molecule jatrorrhizine, produced by 
Berberis ranadensjs callus tissue. 
served here for the first time, but has been used surprisingly little in biosynthetic exper- 
iments in the past, (1  1). 
As a result, we have to assume that tyrosine is not metabolized solely via DOPA. 
DOPA seems to be converted predominantly to dopamine by decarboxylation, which 
serves as precursor for the upper portion of the benzylisoquinoline system. Some 
dopamine is converted also by deamination to 3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetaldehyde. The 
main portion of the benzyl precursor is, however, formed from tyramine by deamina- 
tion and subsequent hydroxylation of the 4-hydroxyphenylacetaldehyde thus formed. 
Monoamine oxidase acting on both tyramine and dopamine, and phenolase activity hy- 
droxylating all three substances ‘(tyramine, tyrosine, and 4-hydroxyphenylacetal- 
dehyde) are also present in the cells. The latter enzyme was discovered in crude extracts 
of the Berberis cell culture purified, and its properties were then studied (17). There was 
also evidence for some weak activity decarboxylatingp-hydroxyphenylpyruvate to yield 
p-hydroxyphenylacetaldehyde (17). In the past, internal pool sizes of metabolites and 
compartments in which some of these enzymes are located (17) have certainly influ- 
enced the interpretation of feeding and incorporation experiments conducted with dis- 
tant precursors of isoquinoline alkaloids (4). We now regard the link between primary 
metabolism (tyrosine, DOPA) and secondary metabolism (dopamine, 3,4-dihydroxy- 
phenylacetaldehyde) as largely understood. 
ENZYMES AND INTERMEDIATES.-The final aim in elucidating a metabolic path- 
way is the isolation and characterization of the individual enzymes catalyzing the step- 
wise transformation of the primary precursors to the ultimate products. During the past 
years, we have been able to isolate all four enzymes involved in the synthesis of ( S  -re- 
ticuline, a central intermediate in benzylisoquinoline biosynthesis (Figure 5). The first 
enzyme in this biosynthetic pathway is (S)-norlaudanosoline synthase, which we dis- 
covered in cell-free systems from representatives of ten different genera from three plant 
families (13,18). This novel enzyme condenses dopamine with 3,4-dihydroxy- 
phenylacetaldehyde to yield norlaudanosoline directly. The aldehyde, rather than the 
previously postulated 3,4-dihydroxyphenylpyruvate, is the substrate for this condensa- 
tion reaction. The reaction product was proven to possess the 1-a-H-(S) configuration. 
There was, however, a considerable amount of nonenzymatic condensation of aldehyde 
with amine taking place under the incubation conditions, yielding racemic nor- 
laudanosoline. 
This first intermediate in the reticuline pathway is 0-methylated predominantly in 
730 Journal of Natural Products {Vol. 48,  No. 5 
Dopamine 
Ho op"2 + H,pO - 1 Hoq&A,H:xp+rL. / O 
Hod ' ' OH 
HO 
3.L-Gihydroxyphmyl- (S)-Norlaudanosolinc (Sb6-Met h ylnorlaudanosoline 
acetaldehyde 
(S)-Norreticulina (s)- Reticuline (S)-Scoulerine 
(S)-Tetrohydrocolurnbamino Columbamine Berberine 
FIGURE 5 .  The biosynthetic pathway to berberine involving eight different enzymes that were isolated 
and characterized from protoberberine-containing cell suspension cultures. 
the 6 position, S-adenosyl-L-methionine (SAM) being the methyl group donator. The 
enzyme catalyzing this reaction was found to occur in serveral species of four families, 
all containing isoquinoline alkaloids. This enzyme does not distinguish between (R)- 
and (9-norlaudanosoline, and besides about 80 percent of 6-0-methylnor- 
laudanosoline, about 20 percent of 7-0- methylnorlaudanosoline is formed ( 19). 6-0- 
Methylnorlaudanosoline is further modified by an enzyme that specifically methylates 
the 4'-OH group of this intermediate to yield norreticuline. This enzyme, which is pre- 
sently being investigated in our laboratory by T. Frenzel, is highly stereospecific in that 
it only utilizes the substrate with the (S)-configuration. The final step in the biosyn- 
thesis of reticuline is the N-methylation of norreticuline. This new enzyme was disco- 
vered (20) in a number of species belonging to the genera Berberis, Cwydzlis, Eschscholt- 
zia, Fumuria, and Thalictrum. The N-methyltransferase has a rather broad substrate 
specificity in that it methylates several differently substituted norbenzylisoquinoline 
alkaloids. The enzyme is also not stereospecific in that it uses both (R)- and (S) - '  isomers. 
This enzyme, in combination with isotopically labeled SAM and stereochemically pure 
(R)- or (S)-norreticuline as substrate, can provide the respective reticuline species with 
extremely high specific activities for use in biosynthetic or enzymatic experiments. 
(S)-Reticuline is the main branch point intermediate in the biosynthesis of 
isoquinoline alkaloids. The molecule is able to undergo many different transformations 
to yield the structural diversity of alkaloids depicted in Figure 1. One of these pos- 
sibilities is the formation of protoberberine alkaloids. The first enzyme, which is the 
only one in this pathway that had previously been detected and purified sevenfold from 
cell cultures of Maduya (2 l), is responsible for the formation of the berberine bridge. 
W e  have devised a new assay system for this enzyme (22), which relies on the use of N- 
CT,-(S)-reticuline as substrate. The conversion of this labeled substrate to scoulerine, 
the-established product of the berberine bridge enzyme (BBE) (2 1, 22), results in the 
release of exactly one-third of the radioactivity of the N-methyl label into the aqueous 
phase of the incubation mixture. This enzyme was found to occur in more than 50 dif- 
Sep-Oct 19851 Zenk et ai. : Benzylisoquinoline Biosynthesis 73 1 
Particle 
bound 
ferentiated plants and cell cultures. It was purified to homogeneity and characterized 
(Table 2). The previously postulated (S)-reticuline-N-oxide is neither a substrate nor an 
intermediate in this reaction. Besides scoulerine, stoichiometric amounts of H202 are 
produced by the BBE. A second enzyme acts on scoulerine as substrate (23) .  It is a new 
methyltransferase which catalyzes the stereospecific and regiospecific 0-methylation at 
position 9 of (S)-scoulerine using SAM as methyl group donor (Figure 5) .  This enzyme 
transforms (3)-scoulerine to (S)-tetrahydrocolumbamine. This product i, next trans- 
formed into the protoberberine columbamine by the specific oxidation of ring C by a 
new enzyme, (S)-tetrahydroprotoberberine oxidase (abbreviated STOX) (24 ) ,  which 
Stereo 
specificity 
TABLE 2.  Some Properties of the  Eight  Enzymes Involved in Berberine Biosynthesis, 
Indicat ine also Source of Cell  Cultures used for Isolation of Each En 
Norlaudanosoline 
Synthase 
6-0-Merhyltransferse 
4'-O-Methyltransfere 
N-Methyltransferase 
Berberine Bridge Enzyme 
@BE) 
Scoulerine-9-0- 
methyltransferase 
(S)-Tetrah ydroproto- 
berberine Oxidase (STOX) 
Berberine Synthase 
- 
No. 
Erchrrholtzia 
tenulfolza 
Argmone 
plat] cerai 
Glauczimr 
rubruni 
Bwbrrii 
t ulgarzi 
Berberzi 
heanzana 
Bwberzi 
u zlmniar 
zar rubiaulialatd 
Bwberzi 
u zlionrar 
tar rabiaulialatr 
Berberrr 
rtolonzfera 
Purification 
Namea 
No 
No 
No 
No 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
40 
80 
40 
100 
homo- 
geneous 
27 
horno- 
geneous 
homo- 
geneous 
PH- 
(optimum) 
7.8 
7 . 5  
7.5  
7.7 
8 .9  
8 .9  
8 .9  
8.9 
klolecular 
weight 
(kD) 
15 
47 
68 
68 
49 
63 
100 
32 
m e  
I 
"Enzymes No 1-4 belong to the general 6)-reticuline pathway, Enzymes No 5-8 are part of the protoberberine 
bNo asymmetric center in the molecule. 
pathway 
catalyzes the dehydrogenation of more than 20 different tetrahydroprotoberberines, in- 
cluding canadine, capaurimine, coramine, coreximine, corydaline, corydalmine, 
corypalmine, discretamine, isocorypalmine, methoxycorytenchirine, tetrahydro- 
palmatrubine, scoulerine, stepholidine, stylopine, and tetrahydropalmatine. The en- 
zyme is absolutely specific for the substrate with the (S)-configuration. The enzyme was 
purified to homogeneity and characterized: It is a flavine enzyme producing 1 mole 
H,02 per mole of substrate under consumption of oxygen. Later, our enzyme was also 
detected in crude callus homogenates by Beecher and Kelleher (25) .  Their claim that 
tetrahydrojatrorrhizine is not a substrate for this enzyme is incorrect. Using authentic 
substrate (by ms, nmr) and enzyme from Berberrs aggregata {a species that has been used 
by these authors (25)], it can be seen in Figure 6 that tetrahydrojatrorrhizine is also an 
excellent substrate for the enzyme from this plant. The suggested reaction mechanism 
for the oxidation of tetrahydroisoquinolines is given by Amann et a / .  (24) .  
Columbamine thus formed is further transformed by another enzyme to yield ber- 
berine. This reaction involves the formation of a methylenedioxy ring. The enzyme 
catalyzing this reaction has been purified to homogeneity from Berberis stoionifea (26). 
It is an Fe++-containing enzyme with a surprisingly high temperature optimum (70") 
and is the first enzyme found to form a methylenedioxy ring from a methoxy group ad- 
jacent to a phenolic hydroxyl (Figure 5 ) .  This enzyme completes the sequence of four 
7 3 2  Journal of Natural Products [Vol. 48, No. 5 
J 
(R)-Tetrahydrojatrorrhizine time [min] 
10 20 30 4 0  50 60 
FIGURE 6. Oxidation of (S)-tetrahydrojatrorrhizine by 
STOX. Jatrorrhizine formation was photometri- 
cally monitored at 369 nm and calculated with 
@‘Y6xg9=25.2 X 106cm2mol-’. The borate buf- 
fered (0.05 M, pH 8.9) incubation mixture (0.7 
ml) contained 40 FM substrate and 0.1 ml en- 
zyme preparation 10-70% (NH4),W4; Sephadex 
G-251 from Berberis uggregufa (1.1 mg/ml pro- 
tein). (R)-Tetrahydrojatrorrhizine was taken as 
control. 
enzymes involved in the formation of berberine from (S)-reticuline. The chain of reac- 
tions starting from dopamine and 3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetaldehyde and leading to 
berberine is shown in Figure 5. Some properties of the eight enzymes, seven of which 
have been discovered and characterized in our laboratory, are shown in Table 2 .  Ber- 
berine is used medicinally, especially in East Asia. It is the first alkaloid whose biosyn- 
thesis is now completely understood at the enzyme level. 
COMPARTMENTATION.-Homogenizing cultured cells of the genus Berberzs in 
phosphate buffer results in a soluble enzyme preparation, containing all eight of the 
above-described enzymes of the berberine pathway. Using a gentle cell disintegration 
method with an isotonic sucrose-containing buffer and subjecting this preparation to 
sucrose density ultracentrifugation, and subsequently analyzing the gradient for activ- 
ity of the individual enzymes, Amann et al. demonstrated (27) that only six of the en- 
zymes were indeed soluble, while two of them (BBE and STOX) were found in one and 
the same particle fraction showing a buoyant density of p= 1.14 g/cm3. Figure 7 shows 
a typical fractionation profile, illustrating the separation of organelles and indicating 
the position of marker enzymes for organelles. By electron microscopy, this fraction was 
seen to be predominantly composed of smooth vesicles ( 2 7 ) .  Freezing and thawing of 
this preparation liberated both enzymes and rendered them completely soluble. Analy- 
sis of the protein composition of this preparation by SDS-gel electrophoresis revealed 
the presence of only about ten separable proteins, of which two major ones are BBE and 
STOX. By immunoelectrophoresis it could be demonstrated that STOX is exclusively 
located in these vesicles. Incubation of these vesicles with the substrate (S)-reticuline in 
the presence and absence of S-adenosyl-L-methionine in both cases led to the formation 
of a red product identified as dehydroscoulerine. This fact indicates that no methyl- 
Sep-Oct 19851 Zenk etal. : Benzylisoquinoline Biosynthesis 
Micre 
u i e s  Chloroplasts ER Tonoplast - - T -  
Mitochondria Golgi 
2 4  6 8 1 0  20 
2.2  ml Fractions 
733 
130 
120 i 
* . E 
00 
x 
Y 
.- 
1.10 E 
100 
FIGURE 7 .  Typical fractionation profile of a sucrose density gradient 
separation of organelles isolated from Berberjs wzisoniae var. 
srr&urrliuiutu. BBE and STOX enzyme activity were localized 
exclusively with matching peaks at a density of 6= 1.14 g/ 
cm j . 
transferase is located in the vesicles. If the cytoplasmic enzyme S-adenosyl-L- 
methionine:(S)-scoulerine-9-0-methyltransfetase is added to this smooth vesicle prepa- 
ration, in the presence of (S)-reticuline and SAM, no dehydroscouletine, but rather col- 
umbamine, is formed (Table 3). Columbamine is the immediate precursor of berberine 
(26).  
Finally, addition of soluble berberine synthase enzyme to the vesicles that are syn- 
thesizing columbamine leads predominantly to the formation of berberine. The cooper- 
ation of vesicular and cytoplasmic enzymes therefore leads to berberine, a late product 
of this biosynthetic branch. The isolated vesicles are yellow. Analysis of the pigments 
demonstrated that the vesicles contained protoberberine alkaloids in the same ratio as is 
found in the cultivated cells. These vesicles have been found in members of four differ- 
ent plant families: Annonaceae, Berberidaceae, Ranunculaceae, and Menispermaceae, 
in cell cultures as well as in differentiated tissue. These vesicles are the first highly spe- 
cific and unique compartment serving only for alkaloid biosynthesis. From a regulatory 
point of view, the vesicles must play a major role in determining the direction of 
biosynthesis. Reticuline (Figure 1) can be transformed to a multitude of isoquinoline 
structures even within one and the same cell culture (6). Once a molecule of (S)-re- 
ticuline enters a vesicle, however, its further metabolic fate is immediately determined. 
The exclusive Occurrence of BBE within the vesicles will transform the precursor 
molecule reticuline, to scoulerine, which means that only a protoberberine structure 
can result as a consequence of this entry. Scoulerine, now possessing the berberine 
bridge, can leave the vesicle and be further methylated or transformed in other ways. 
Reentry of the modified molecule into the vesicle will yield oxidized ptotoberberines 
(e.g., columbamine), which can undergo further metabolism to berberine, and open- 
ing of the methylenedioxy ring (7) will eventually lead to jatrorrhizine, the major sec- 
734 Journal of Natural Products [Vol. 48,  No. 3 
TABLE 3. In Vitro Transformation of Labeled Reticuline by 
Vesicles Cooperating with Cytoplasmic Enzymes 
Relative amount of alkaloids (5%) 
Alkaloid formed I Sample numbeP 
Reticuline‘ 
Dehydroreticuline 
Scoulerine 
Dehydroscoulerine 
Tetrahydrocolumbamine 
Columbamine 
Canadine 
Berberine 
l b  
41 
0 
20 
39 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2c 
37 
0 
8 
0 
0 
55 
0 
0 
40 
49 
“All three samples (0.5 ml, 14% sucrose) contained 0.01 mM 
{“C-N]-(S)-reticuline (0.3 pCi), 0.2 mM SAM and 0 .1  ml purified 
vesicles (0.02 mg protein containing 5 pkat BBE and 22 pkat STOX) 
in tricine gradient buffer. 
bSample 1 was incubated without further additions. 
‘Cytoplasmic S-adenosyl-L-methionine: (S)-scoulerine-9-O-methyl- 
transferase (22.5 pkat) was added to sample 2. 
dSample 3 contained 0.01 pkat of berberine synthase besides the 
methyltransferase. After 10 h incubation at 30’ the alkaloids were ex- 
tracted and identified by tlc in two solvent systems. 
‘Residual amount. 
ondary metabolite of Bwbwzs cell cultures. Thus, the number ofvesicles, their location 
within the cytoplasm of the cell, and possibly an active or even passive uptake system 
for reticuline within the vesicle membrane will determine the amount of cytoplasmic 
(S)-reticuline that will be transformed into protoberberines. 
VACUOLAR STORAGE.-It is now general knowledge that alkaloids are accumu- 
lated and stored within plant vacuoles. The question remains how the isoquinoline al- 
kaloids that are formed in the cytoplasm (with or without participation of vesicles) are 
finally deposited in the vacuole. The transport of alkaloids from the cytosol across the 
vacuolar membrane-the tonoplast-into the vacuole is crucial for the storage of al- 
kaloids in the vacuolar space. A simple model for alkaloid accumulation in vacuoles of 
plant cells is based on the fact that vacuolar cell sap is acidic. According to this model, 
alkaloids can freely pass through the tonoplast by diffusion in their lipophilic forms. In 
the acidic vacuole, they are protonated and therefore trapped as cations to which the 
tonoplast is not permeable; see literature cited by Deus-Neumann and Zenk (28). This 
phenomenon has been called the “ion-trap mechanism.” Doubts about this ion-trap 
mechanism arose when we could demonstrate (29,30) that isolated vacuoles of an al- 
kaloid-containing plant take up only those alkaloids that are indigenous to the plant 
species from which the vacuoles had been isolated. Vacuoles of alkaloid-free plants did 
not take up any alkaloids. Vacuolar alkaloid transport was characterized as an active, 
probably energy-requiring mechanism (30). For a further characterization of this trans- 
port system, isolated vacuoles from Fumavza capveafutu cell cultures were used. The dif- 
ferential uptake of two alkaloids, reticuline and scoulerine, in both their (S) -  and (R)-  
configurations, was investigated (28). It was demonstrated that the uptake of alkaloids 
is carrier-mediated, as shown by its substrate saturation and its sensitivity to metabolic 
inhibitors. Most interestingly, however, only the (S)-forms of reticuline and scoulerine 
were taken up, while the @)-enantiomers, which do not occur in this plant species, 
Sep-Oct 19851 Zenk et a/ .  : Benzylisoquinoline Biosynthesis 735 
were strictly discriminated against (Figure 8). Saturation of the uptake system is 
achieved with a concentration of ca. 0.5 pM (S)-reticuline in the incubation medium. 
The K,-value for the uptake is calculated as 0 .3  p M  and was exactly in the range of 
KM-values determined for other alkaloids in several plant species (30). The carrier has a 
high affinity for the substrate, and the transport was stimulated sevenfold by ATP. As 
shown in Table 4 ,  this stimulation of (3)-reticuline uptake into Fumaria vacuoles is 
highly specific for ATP; none of the other nucleotide triphosphates, as well as ADP, 
AMP, or adenosine, stimulate this vacuolar transport. In addition, evidence was found, 
60- 
s 50- 
*$ 40- 
Y E, 
4 20- 
5- 
-L 
3 
- 
3, 
X 
30- 
r 
10- 
(R)-Reticuline 
- - - - -  
0 0.1 02 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 
Alkaloid IkMl 
FIGURE 8. Uptake of (S)-reticuline and (R)-reticuline by isolated vacuoles 
ofFunzaria rapreolata as a function of concentration. The alkaloid 
uptake was determined after 40 min of incubation using enan- 
tiomer specific radioimmunoassays, substracting the endogene- 
ous (S)-reticuline level of the vacuoles. 
using ATPase inhibitors and proton gradient dissipators, that vacuolar alkaloid trans- 
port follows a proton-antiport mechanism. Efflux experiments with vacuoles preloaded 
with labeled (3)-reticuline proved that alkaloid unloading of the vacuoles is also highly 
specific and energy dependent. The data now accumulated present clear evidence that 
alkaloids are readily channeled in and out of the vacuole by energy-dependent carrier- 
mediated transport. Very probably, the same carrier mediates transport in both direc- 
tions, and there is no doubt about the energization of the transport process. The ion- 
trap mechanism is therefore no longer tenable for the explanation of alkaloid accumula- 
tion in plant vacuoles. 
Alkaloid transport through the tonoplast membrane proceeds neither by diffusion 
nor by a channel protein mechanism. Evidence is now accumulating (28-30) that for 
every alkaloid there is a highly specific alkaloid carrier or specific binding site of a gen- 
eral carrier present in the tonoplast membrane. A working model showing the possible 
mechanism by which alkaloids are transported into and out ofvacuoles is shown in Fig- 
ure 9. This model agrees in principle with the hypothesis developed for general product 
transport in plant vacuoles (3 1, 32). 
736 
Compound added" 
(0 mM) 
ATP (0.5 mM) control 
Adenosine (0.5 mM) 
AMP (0.5 mM) 
ADP (0.5 mM) 
CTP(O.5 mM) 
GTP (0.5 mM) 
ITP(0.5mM) 
UTP (0.5 mM) 
Journal of Natural Products [Vol. 48, No. 5 
(SkReticuline uptake 
pmol control 
(106vacuoles-') (%) 
37.1 15 
253.0 100 
29.0 12 
11.5 5 
15.1 6 
20.2 8 
29.9 12 
35.4 14 
81.0 32 
"Additions were made to 1-ml samples of 
Fumaria vacuole suspension (4.5 X 105/ml) prior to 
the addition of [3H]-(S)-reticuline (500 pmol/ml). 
Incubation of all samples was terminated after 40 
min by filtration centrifugation. 
Cytosol Tonoplast Vacuo le 
pH 7.0 pH 5.0 
FIGURE 9. Working model showing the function of H+- 
translocating ATPase in a highly specific al- 
kaloid transport system in the tonoplast mem- 
brane. 
CONCLUsIONS.-we may infer from the above findings that, in general, studies 
involving labeled precursors, using differentiated plants or even using crude, un- 
purified enzyme extracts, have not led to the true sequence of biosynthetic events. En- 
zymatic work, purification, and characterization of the enzymes involved, as well as 
Sep-Oct 19851 Zenk etal. : Benzylisoquinoline Biosynthesis 737 
studies about their compartmentation will lead to the knowledge of how secondary 
products are formed, transported, and stored in plants. For a few groups of alkaloids, 
we can now imagine nature’s fascinating strategy in secondary plant product biosyn- 
thesis at that level; these are the indole alkaloids ( 3 3 ) ,  the quinolizidine alkaloids (34), 
and the protoberberine alkaloids shown here. Looking at the rapidly developing and 
commercially attractive field of gene technology, we should remember that unless we 
know the gene products (meaning the particular enzymes of secondary pathways), we 
will be able neither to understand the metabolic sequences leading to natural products, 
nor to locate and isolate the genes responsible for the synthesis of the respective en- 
zymes. Considering the magnificent application fundamental and industrial research 
has found for microbial genes, we should keep in mind that there are only about 3000 
bacterial and 60,000 fungal species known up to now, in contrast to the existence of 
more than 370,000 plant species (35), plants which are filled with enormous numbers 
of highly diverse secondary product types serving many allelochemical functions. This 
tremendous gene pool within the plant kingdom, producing enzymes catalyzing the 
most remarkable chemical reactions, has not yet been touched. It will be the responsi- 
bility of plant scientists to develop our knowledge about secondary pathways, which 
will ultimately lead us to the genes involved in the synthesis of secondary products and 
to the broad field of biotechnological application of this knowledge. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Linguistic help by Dr. Bruce Cassels during the preparation of this manuscript is gratefully acknowl- 
edged. This work was supported by SFB 145 of the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, Bonn, and by the 
Fonds der Chemischen Industrie. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4 .  
5. 
6.  
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
18. 
19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
23. 
24. 
25. 
26. 
27. 
LITERATURE CITED 
M. Shamrna, The Isoquinoline Alkaloids, Academic Press, New York, 1972. 
M. Sharnma and J.L. Moniot, Isoquinoline AlkaloidResearch 1972-1977, Plenum Press, New York, 
1978. 
G.A. Cordell, Introduction to Alkaloids, John Wiley, New York, 198 1. 
I.D. Spencer, in: Comprehensive Biochemistry, 20,  231 (1968). 
M. Rueffer, in: The Chemistry and Biology of lsoquinoline Alkaloids, Ed. by J.D. Phillipson, et al . ,  
Springer, Heidelberg, 1985, p. 265. 
T. Tanahashi and M.H.  Zenk, Plant Cell Rep., 4 ,  96 (1985). 
M.H. Zenk, in: The Chemistry and Biology oflsoquinoline Alkaloids, Ed. by J.D. Phillipson, et  a(. , 
Springer, Heidelberg, 1985, p. 240. 
W.J. Kelleher, A. Rother, E. Wellrnann, H .  Grisebach, Planta Med. 40, 127 (1980). 
E. Winterstein and G. Trier, Die Alkaloide, Gebriider Borntdger, Berlin, 1910. 
J .R. Gear and I.D. Spenser, Nature, 191,  1393 (1961). 
H.L. Holland, P.W. Jeffs, T.M. Capps, and D.B. MacLean, CanJ.Chem.. 57, 1588(1979). 
M.L. Wilson and C.J. Coscia,J.Am.Chem.Soc-. , 97, 43 1 (1975). 
H.M. Schurnacher, M. Rueffer, N .  Nagakura, and M.H. Zenk, Planta Med., 48, 2 12 (1983). 
H .  Hinz and M.H.  Zenk, Natunurssensrhafen, 67, 620 (1981). 
E. Spath and F. Kuffner, Chem. Ber . ,  64, 370 (193 i). 
T.M. Kutchan, S. Ayabe and C. J .  Coscia, in: The Chemistry andBiology of lsoquinoline Alkaloids, Ed. 
by J.D. Phillipson, etal. , Springer, Heidelberg, 1985 (and literature cited therein), p. 281. 
M. Rueffer and M.H. Zenk, manuscript in preparation. 
M. Rueffer, H .  El-Shagi, N .  Nagakura, and M.H. Zenk, FEBS Lett., 129.5 (198 1). 
M. Rueffer, N.  Nagakura, and M.H. Zenk, Planta Med., 49, 13 1 (1983). 
C.K. Wat,  P. Steffens, and M.H. Zenk, in press (1986). 
E. Rink and H .  Bohm, F E E S  Lett., 49, 396 (1975). 
P. Steffens, N .  Nagakura, and M.H. Zenk, Phytochemistry, in press (1985). 
S. Muernrnler, M. Rueffer, N.  Nagakura, and M.H. Zenk, Plant Cell Rep., 4 ,  36 (1985) 
M. Amann, N .  Nagakura, and M.H.  Zenk, Tetrahedron Lett., 2 5 ,  953 (1984). 
C .W.W.  Beecher and W.J. Kelleher, Tetrahedron Lett., 25, 4595 (1984). 
M. Rueffer and M.H.  Zenk, Tetrahedron Lett., 26,  201 (1985). 
M. Amann, G .  Wanner, and M.H.  Zenk, Planta, (in press). 
738 Journal of Natural Products [Vol. 48, No. 5 
28. 
29. 
30. 
3 1. 
32. 
33. 
34. 
35 
B. Deus-Neumann and M.H.  Zenk, Planta, (in press). 
B. Deus and M.H. Zenk, Biotechn.Biwng., 24, 1965 (1982). 
B. Deus-Neumann and M.H.  Zenk, Planta, 162, 250 (1984). 
H .  Sze, Physiol.Plantarum, 61, 683 (1984). 
C.  Werner and P. Matile, ].Plant Physiol., 118, 237 (1985). 
J .  Stiickigt, in: Indole and Biogeneticall) Related Alkaloids, Ed. by J.D. Phillipson and M.H.  Zenk, 
Academic Press, London, 1980. 
M. Wink and T. Hartman, in: Natural Products Chmisrq 1984, Elsevier Science Publishers, 
Amsterdam, 1984, p.  5 11. 
D.  von Denffer, F. Ehrendorfer, K. Magdefrau, and H .  Ziegler, Lebrbuch dw Botanrk, Fischer, 
Stuttgart, 1978. 
