358 E. A. BELL AND A. S. L. TIRIMANNA 1964
ninhydrin-positive compound with RF values and ionic
mobilities corresponding to those of authentic y-hydroxy-
ornithine in the five solvent systems and three buffer
solutions used.
This compound gave the characteristic brown-grey
reaction of y-hydroxyornithine on paper when treated
successively with ninhydrin and Ehrlich's reagent and a
yellow colour with the periodate-acetylacetone reagent of
Schwartz.
DISCUSSION
The genus Lathyrus may be subdivided into
groups of species, each of which is characterized by
a common association of free amino acids or related
compounds that occur in concentrations of about
1% in the seeds of its constituent members (Bell,
1962). Among these compounds are ay-diamino-
butyric acid (Ressler, Redstone & Erenberg,
1961), homoarginine, lathyrine, y-hydroxyhomo-
arginine (Bell, 1963) and a compound tentatively
identified as f-oxalylaminoalanine (oc-amino-
f-oxamoylaminopropionic acid) (Adiga, Rao &
Sarma, 1963). A survey of the ninhydrin-
positive compounds present in the seeds of the
closely related genus Vicia (Bell & Tirimanna,
1963b) has revealed that this genus may also
be subdivided on the same basis. The com-
pounds present in high concentration in the seeds
of Vicia are not, however, the same as those in
Lathyru8, and include arginine, canavanine, -
cyanoalanine (Ressler, 1962) and y-hydroxy-
arginine, the isolation of which has been described
in the present paper. Therefore one genus (Vicia)
stores relatively high concentrations of canavanine
and the C6 guanidino amino acids arginine and
y-hydroxyarginine, whereas the other (Lathyrus)
stores predominently the C7 amino acids homoargin-
ine, y-hydroxyhomoarginine and the related
compound lathyrine.
SUMMARY
1. The occurrence of y-hydroxyarginine in
plants has been confirmed by the isolation of its
lactone from seeds of Vicia sativa.
2. A new natural amino acid, y-hydroxy-
ornithine, has been identified by chromatography
and ionophoresis in the seeds of Vicia onobrycho-
ide8 and V. unijuga.
3. The closely related genera, LathyruB and
Vicia, characteristically store different groups of
guanidino amino acids.
4. A colour reaction for the identification of
y-hydroxyornithine on paper is described.
We thank Professor H. Harris for his interest in this
work and Mr W. G. Mackenzie for help in obtaining seed.
REFERENCES
Adiga, P. R., Rao, S. L. N. & Sarma, P. S. (1963). Curr.
Sci. 32, 153.
Bell, E. A. (1962). Biochem. J. 83, 225.
Bell, E. A. (1963). Nature, Lond., 199, 70.
Bell, E. A. & Tirimanna, A. S. L. (1963a). Nature, Lond.,
197, 901.
Bell, E. A. & Tirimanna, A. S. L. (1963 b). Biochem. J. 88,
29P.
Fugita, Y. (1959). Bull. chem. Soc. Japan, 32, 439.
Gray, D. 0. & Fowden, L. (1962). Nature, Lond., 193,
1285.
Gross, D. (1961). J. Chromat. 5, 194.
Hirst, G. E. & Foster, R. G. (1964). Biochem. J. 91, 361.
Jepson, J. B. & Smith, I. (1953). Nature, Lond., 172, 1100.
Larsen, P. 0. & Kjaer, A. (1960). Biochim. biophy8. Acta,
38, 148.
Makisumi, S. (1961). J. Biochem., Tokyo, 49, 284.
Ressler, C. (1962). J. biol. Chem. 237, 733.
Ressler, C., Redstone, P. A. & Erenberg, R. H. (1961).
Science, 134, 188.
Schwartz, D. P. (1958). Analyt. Chem. 30, 1855.
Smith, I. (1953). Nature, Lond., 171, 43.
Biochem. J. (1964) 91, 358
The Isolation of y-Hydroxyhomoarginine, as its Lactone, from Seeds
of Lathyrus tingitanus, its Biosynthesis and Distribution
BY E. A. BELL
Department of Biochemistry, King's College, London, W.C. 2
(Received 26 September 1963)
A study of the free amino acids and related
compounds in the seeds of 49 species of Lathyru8
(Bell, 1962a) revealed.the presence in the seeds of
L. aphaca, L. cyan?s, L. 8phaericus and L. tingitanuw
of lathyrine (i.e. 2-aminopyrimidin-4-ylalanine;
Bell & Foster, 1962), homoarginine (Bell, 1962b)
and a third new amino acid designated B3, sub-
sequently reported to bo y-hydroxyhomoarginine
(i.e. o-amino-E-guanidino-y-hydroxyhexanoic acid;
Bell, 1963). The existence of the last-named amino
acid had been predicted by Rao, Ramachandran &
Adiga (1963), who visualized it as a likely inter-
y-HYDROXYHOMOARGININE IN LATHYRUS
mediate in the biosynthesis of lathyrine from
homoarginine. The present paper describes the
isolation of y-hydroxyhomoarginine, as its lactone,
from seed of L. tingitanru, its biosynthesis from
homoarginine in the same species and its occurrence
in the seeds of other lathyrine-containing species of
Lathyru8.
EXPERIMENTAL
Methods
Chromatography. One-dimensional chromatograms were
prepared by the descending technique on Whatman no. 1
paper with the solvent systems described by Bell & Tiri-
manna (1964).
lonophoresis. lonophoresis was conducted on Whatman
no. 1 paper with the buffer solutions described by Bell &
Tirimanna (1964).
Development of colours. Chromatograms and ionophoresis
papers were dipped in ninhydrin reagent [0-2% (w/v)
ninhydrin in 95% (v/v) acetone] and developed at 800.
Sakaguchi's reagent was prepared according to the method
of Jepson & Smith (1953).
Detection of y-hydroxyhomoarginine. y-Hydroxyhomo-
arginine was detected as a basic compound giving an
orange-red colour with Sakaguchi's reagent, a grey-purple
colour with ninhydrin and a mono-a-amino carboxylic acid
reaction with cupric nitrate and ninhydrin (Larsen &
Kjaer, 1960). The amino acid moved slightly slower than
lathyrine when subjected to ionophoresis at pH 1-9.
Radioautography. Radioautographs were prepared by
placing Kodirex film (Kodak Ltd., London) in contact with
ionophoresis papers for 3 weeks.
Isolation of y-hydroxyhomoarginine lactone
Finely ground seed of L. tingitanus (50 g.) was defatted
and largely freed of lathyrine by extraction with methanol
for 200 hr. in a Soxhlet apparatus. The defatted seed was
shaken for 2 hr. with 50% (v/v) ethanol (200 ml.) and
filtered after 17 hr. at room temperature. This extraction
procedure was repeated six times, the combined extracts
were concentrated under reduced pressure to 100 ml. and
passed through a column (1 cm. x 19 cm.) of De-Acidite FF,
a strong anion-exchange resin. The alkaline effluent was
passed through a column (1 cm. x 28 cm.) of Zeo-Karb 226,
a weak cation-exchange resin, which retained the guanidino
amino acids. The Zeo-Karb column was washed with water
until the effluent was colourless and ninhydrin-negative,
and the guanidino amino acids were eluted with N-
ammonia. Fractions giving a Sakaguchi reaction were
combined and concentrated in vacuo at room temperature
over CaCl2 and H2SO4. On ionophoresis at pH 1-9 a sample
of the concentrate, to which lathyrine (giving a red
ninhydrin reaction) had been added as marker, was found
to contain high concentrations of y-hydroxyhomoarginine
together with traces of homoarginine (which moves slightly
faster than lathyrine at pH 1-9). The concentrate was
redissolved in water (2 ml.), and a solution of flavianic
acid (0 5 g.) dissolved in hot water (2 ml.) was added.
After 17 hr. at 40 the flavianate was removed by filtration
and recrystallized three times from water. On ionophoresis
at pH 1 9 a sample ofthe recrystallized flavianate was found
to be free of homoarginine.
The flavianate (0-3 g.) was stirred with 1 N-HCl (1 ml.)
and after 17 hr. at 40 the free flavianic acid was removed by
filtration. The filtrate was evaporated to dryness overNaOH
under reduced pressure at room temperature, and the
residue was stirred with ethanol (5 ml.) and aniline (0-1 ml.),
and recrystallized from aqueous ethanol; during recrystal-
lization the amino acid underwent a transformation and a
more basic (as indicated by ionic mobility) artifact (0-1 g.)
giving a yellow colour with ninhydrin was isolated. This
artifact analysed as the dihydrochloride of a hydroxy-
homoarginine lactone or isomer, m.p. 2140 (uncorr.)
(Found: C, 32-7; H, 6-4; Cl, 27-5; N, 22-0. C7Hl4N402,2HCI
requires C, 32-4; H, 6-2; Cl, 27-4; N, 21-6%).
Reversion of the artifact to the original amino acid in
alkaline solution. The isolated salt (2-4 mg.) was dissolved
in 2N-ammonia and the solution evaporated to dryness
under reduced pressure at room temperature. The residue
was redissolved in 10% (v/v) propan-2-ol (1 ml.) and spots
(10 pl.) of the solution were subjected to chromatography
and ionophoresis in the solvent systems and buffer solutions
described by Bell & Tirimanna (1964). The solutions gave
a strong grey-purple spot with ninhydrin the Rp values and
ionic mobilities of which corresponded in all solvents and
buffer solutions to those of the original spot observed in the
seed extract.
A strong maximum at 5-68 te (see Appendix) present in
the infrared-absorption spectrum of the artifact disap-
peared on reversion to the original amino acid; this
behaviour was consistent with the opening of a y-lactone
ring.
Nuclear-magnetic-resonance 8pectra. The nuclear-mag-
netic-resonance spectrum (see the Appendix) of the artifact
indicated the presence of a methylene group between the
guanidino and hydroxyl groups in the molecule, a finding
consistent with a y-hydroxyl structure in the compound.
Alkaline hydrolysis of the lactone
The lactone dihydrochloride (4-5 mg.) was refluxed in
0- 1 N-NaOH (5 ml.) for 3 hr. The solution was brought to
pH 7 with N-HCI and evaporated to dryness. The residue
was redissolved in 10% (v/v) propan-2-ol (1 ml.), and spots
(10 ,ul.) were chromatographed in five solvent systems and
subjected to ionophoresis at pH 1-9, 3-6 and 11-6, with
arginine, lysine, ornithine, y-hydroxyornithine and &-
hydroxylysine as markers. The hydrolysate contained one
major and two minor ninhydrin-positive components. One
of the minor components reacted with Sakaguchi's reagent
and moved with the original amino acid in all systems; the
other behaved as a neutral amino acid, gave a yellow colour
with Ehrlich's reagent and was presumably the cor-
responding ureido compound. The major ninhydrin-positive
component that no longer reacted with Sakaguchi's reagent
moved with b-hydroxylysine in the chromatographic
solvents (including the ethyl methyl ketone-propionic acid
solvent which separated it from the remaining markers),
and on ionophoresis at pH 1-9 and 3-6. At pH 11-6 it moved
more slowly than 8-hydroxylysine, suggesting that the pKi
value of its more basic amino group is higher than that of
the E-amino group of 8-hydroxylysine: this pKa value is
influenced by the degree of proximity of a hydroxyl group.
Stability of the latone hydrolysis product to periodate
oxidation. The isolated dihydrochloride (27 mg.) and a
control of y-hydroxyarginine lactone dihydrochloride
monohydrate (18 mg.) were hydrolysed simultaneously.
Vol. 91 359
E. A. BELL
each in 5 ml. of 01N-NaOH, for 3 hr. at 1000. The two
hydrolysates were evaporated to dryness, each was redis-
solved in 0O IN-NaOH (1 ml.) and the solutions were
transferred to the Conway units containing Nessler's
reagent in their outer compartments. After standing for
30 min. to ensure the absence ofammonia 1 drop (0-025 ml.)
of 50% (w/w) H104,2H20 was added to each hydrolysate.
The Nessler's reagent in the unit containing the y-hydroxy-
arginine hydrolysate darkened rapidly whereas that in the
unit containing the hydrolysate of thematerial isolatedfrom
L. tingitanus remained colourless. Tests for the presence
offormaldehyde andacetaldehyde (Schwartz, 1958) onpaper
after treating chromatograms of the L. tingitanus hydro-
lysate with periodate also proved negative.
The failure of both the original amino acid and the
hydrolysis product of its lactone to react with periodate
indicated that the hydroxyl group in the amino acid was
vicinal neither to the a-amino group (detected with cupric
nitrate and ninhydrin) nor to the guanidino group (detected
with Sakaguchi's reagent). Possible structures fulfilling
this requirement are oc-amino-y-guanidino-e-hydroxy-
hexanoic acid, a-amino-/3-guanidino-8-hydroxyhexanoic
acid and o-amino-e-guanidino-y-hydroxyhexanoic acid
(y-hydroxyhomoarginine). The first of these may be elimi-
nated as it would not form a lactone, and the remaining
compounds would be expected to form 8- and y-lactones
respectively. The isolated material, however, shows
absorption in the infrared region of the spectrum which is
characteristic of a y-lactone (see the Appendix), confirming
the identity of the amino acid as y-hydroxyhomoarginine.
Biosynthesis of y-hydroxyhomoarginine
Plants of L. tingitanus were grown under glass and also
in the open, plants and fruits chosen for individual experi-
ments being as nearly uniform in size as possible.
Introduction of L-[guanidino-14C]homoarginine into fruits
of Lathyrus tingitanus. Each fruit chosen was allowed to
develop until it had reached its maximum length (about
8 cm.), and at this stage, before the ovules showed signifi-
cant swelling, L-[guanidino-14C]homoarginine (supplied by
the California Corp. for Biochemical Research) was intro-
duced. Three methods for introducing the amino acid were
used. The first two were essentially the same as those
described by Grobbelaar & Steward (1953) for the intro-
duction of labelled lysine into the fruit of Phaseolus
vulgaris. In the first of these methods a solution of L-
[guanidino-14C]homoarginine (10 fec) in 01 ml. of water
was injected into the spaces of the fruit surrounding the
ovules. In the second an axillary stem carrying two fruits
was chosen, and when the more advanced of the fruit had
reached the requisite stage of development the second fruit
was cut from its stem and the cut stem immersed in a
solution ofL-[guanidino-_4C]homoarginine (10 lAc) in 0-4 ml.
of water which was absorbed in less than 48 hr. In the
third method two injections, each of 10 ,uc of amino acid
in 01 ml. of water, were made into the hollow main stem
of a single plant below each of two successive fruit-bearing
stems. In every experiment the main stem of the plant
was cut above the fruit or fruits under investigation to
minimize the loss of labelled acid. The fruits were allowed
to ripen and dry on the plants (4-6 weeks) before the seeds
were analysed.
Analysis of seeds. Ground seed (100 mg.) from each of
the fruits was extracted by shaking with 1 ml. of 50% (v/v)
ethanol for 2 hr. After 17 hr. at room temperature the
suspensions were centrifuged and 10 pl. of supernatant
liquid from each extract was applied to paper as a narrow
stripe and subjected to ionophoresis at pH 1-9. When
developed with ninhydrin each extract showed the presence
of three fast-moving positively charged amino acids. The
fastest of these three was homoarginine followed immedi-
ately by the red-reacting lathyrine which in turn was
followed by y-hydroxyhomoarginine. In all extracts the
concentration of y-hydroxyhomoarginine was appreciably
higher than that of the homoarginine itself, and in some
extracts, prepared from seed grown more slowly in the
open, the homoarginine was scarcely detectable. Radio-
autographs showed that all significant radioactivity was
restricted to the homoarginine and the y-hydroxyhomo-
arginine, both of which were strongly labelled, the specific
activities of the two amino acids being approximately
equal. In the seeds grown in the open over 95% of total
radioactivity was found in the y-hydroxyhomoarginine.
All methods of introducing L-[guanidino-'4C]homoargi-
nine proved successful, the highest radioactivity being
found in the fruit supplied through the cut axillary stem
and in the topmost fruit after injection into the main
stem.
Distribution of y-hydroxyhomoarginine. If, as suggested
by Rao et al. (1963) and Bell (1963), y-hydroxyhomo-
arginine is the precursor of lathyrine, then it is to be
expected that the hydroxy amino acid will be present even
if only in trace amounts in all species containing lathyrine.
Extracts of seed (Bell, 1962 a) of all other species of
Lathyrus known to contain high concentrations of lathyrine
(L. alpestris, L. japonicus, L. laevigatus subspecies occi-
dentalis, L. maritimus, L. niger, L. variegatus, L. varius
and L. venetus) were subjected to ionophoresis at pH 1-9
on paper. All extracts contained a ninhydrin-positive
compound that moved as y-hydrohomoarginine (slightly
slower than lathyrine). The concentration of this compound
varied considerably between species and was in all cases
lower than in the original four species in which y-hydroxy-
homoarginine was first detected.
DISCUSSION
The isolation of y-hydroxyhomoarginine, as its
lactone, from seeds of L. tingitanus, the demon-
stration of its biosynthesis from homoarginine and
its identification in the seeds of other lathyrine-
containing species has confirmed the identity of
this new amino acid and provided support for the
suggestion that the hydroxylation of homoarginine
constitutes the first stage in the biosynthesis of
lathyrine.
SUMMARY
1. The new amino acid y-hydroxyhomoarginine
has been isolated from seeds of Lathyrus tingitanus,
as its lactone, and its structure confirmed.
2. The biosynthesis of y-hydroxyhomoarginine
from L-homoarginine in the same species has been
demonstrated.
3. All species of Lathyrus known to contain high
concentrations of lathyrine in their seeds also
360 1964
Vol. 91 y-HYDROXYHOMOARGININE IN LATHYRUS 361
contain a compound identified by ionophoresis as
y-hydroxyhomoarginine.
The author thanks Professor H. Harris for his interest in
this work, Mr J. I. H. Rees of the University of London
Botanical Supply Unit for growing the seed, and the
Agricultural Research Council for a grant to purchase
isotopically labelled amino acids.
REFERENCES
Bell, E. A. (1962a). Biochem. J. 83, 225.
Bell, E. A. (1962 b). Biochem. J. 85, 91.
Bell, E. A. (1963). Nature, Lond., 199, 70.
Bell, E. A. & Foster, R. G. (1962). Nature, Lond., 194, 91.
Bell, E. A. & Tirimanna, A. S. L. (1964). Biochem. J. 91,
356.
Grobbelaar, N. & Steward, F. C. (1953). J. Amer. chem.
Soc. 75, 4341.
Jepson, J. B. & Smith, I. (1953). Nature, Lond., 172,
1100.
Larsen, P. 0. & Kjaer, A. (1960). Biochim. biophy8. Acta,
38, 148.
Rao, S. L. N., Ramachandran, L. K. & Adiga, P. R. (1963).
Biochemistry, 2, 298.
Schwartz, D. P. (1958). Analyt. Chem. 30, 1855.
APPENDIX
Infrared-Absorption and Nuclear-Magnetic-Resonance Spectra of the
Lactones of y-Hydroxyarginine and y-Hydroxyhomoarginine
BY G. E. HIRST AND R. G. FOSTER
Department of Phy8ics, King's College, London, W.C. 2, and Department of Chemistry,
Imperial College of Science and Technology, London, S.W. 7
(Received 26 September 1963)
The availability of authentic y-hydroxyarginine
and y-hydroxyornithine made direct confirmation
of the identity of the guanidino amino acid isolated,
as its lactone, from seeds of Vicia sativa and the
product of its alkaline hydrolysis possible. The
guanidino amino acid found in the seeds ofLathyrus
tingitanfUs, however, had not previously been
described, and, although on the reported evidence its
identity as y-hydroxyhomoarginine, and that of the
isolated artifact as the corresponding lactone,
appeared unambiguous, it was desirable to obtain
confirmation by independent methods.
Infrared-absorption spectra. Spectra were deter-
mined with a double-beam spectrophotometer by
using the KI-pressed-disk technique and a rock-
salt prism. The spectrum of the artifact from
L. tingitanus showed an absorption band at 5-68 I,
as did that from V. sativa. Absorption in this
region of the spectrum is characteristic of y-
lactones (Bellamy, 1958), reconfirming the identity
of y-hydroxyarginine in V. sativa and confirming
that of y-hydroxyhomoarginine in L. tingitanus.
NH
II ~ "I0
H2N NH 0
NH2
(I)
When the artifact from L. tingitanuB was dissolved
in N-ammonia and the solution evaporated to
dryness (in vacuo at room temperature) the residue
showed no absorption at this frequency. When the
disk prepared from this residue was exposed to an
atmosphere containing hydrochloric acid for 17 hr.
and then heated at 1500 in vacuo for a further 1 hr.
it was found that the band at 5-68 , reappeared
though at reduced intensity. These findings are
consistent with the opening of a y-lactone ring in
alkaline solution and its partial re-formation.
Nuclear-magnetic-re8onance 8pectra. On the basis
of the chemical evidence and infrared-absorption
measurements described, the structures of y-
hydroxyarginine lactone (I) and y-hydroxyhomo-
arginine lactone (II) can be assigned to the artifacts
isolated from the seeds of V. 8ativa and L. tingitanus
respectively.
The nuclear-magnetic-resonance spectra of these
two compounds (measured as solutions in D20 at
56-4 Mcyc./sec.) are in accordance with these
assignments.
H2N NH 5 0
NH2
(II)
