BRIEF COMMUNICATION
Gingkolide B as migraine preventive treatment in young age:
results at 1-year follow-up
Susanna Usai • Licia Grazzi • Gennaro Bussone
 The Author(s) 2011. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
Abstract Primary headaches, migraine and tension-type
headaches are some of the most frequent conditions in
young age. Even before pharmacological treatment, it is
mainly useful in these patients to adopt an appropriate
lifestyle, with regular sleep, meals, computer and TV, sport,
and avoiding triggers. Any specific and effective pharma-
cological treatment for migraine and tension-type headache
is never lacking in side effects. Gingkolide B, an herbal
constituent extract from Ginko biloba tree leaves, is a nat-
ural anti platelet activating factor (PAF). PAF is a potent
pro inflammatory and nociceptive agent released during the
inflammation process. Therefore, Gingkolide B can be
considered a promising non pharmacological tool for
treatment of migraine with and without aura. In an earlier
clinical report, we described our initial attempts to assess
the clinical utility of Gingkolide B in a small group of
young migraine patients. A small sample of 30 young
patients suffering from migraine without aura entered the
open-label prospective trial. Migraine without aura was
diagnosed according to International Headache Society
(IHS) criteria. The treatment was well tolerated and the
compliance was good. Despite the uncontrolled open-label
design of this study and the small sample of patients, these
data show that Gingkolide B seems to be effective as pre-
ventive treatment in reducing migraine attack frequency
and in attenuating the use of symptomatic medication in our
small series of children with primary headache.
Keywords Headache  Young age  Gingkolide B 
Preventive treatment
Introduction
Primary headaches, migraine and tension-type headaches
are some of the most frequent conditions in young age.
Recurrent headaches are common in children and adoles-
cents affecting their quality of life negatively [1], at school
and social activities [2]. Even before pharmacological
treatment, it is mainly useful in these patients to adopt an
appropriate lifestyle, with regular sleep, meals, computer
and TV, sport, and avoiding triggers.
Parents of children suffering for migraine attack prefer
to limit the assumption of symptomatic medication by
adopting non pharmacological treatment, when possible.
Any specific and effective pharmacological treatment for
migraine and tension-type headache is never lacking in side
effects. The same preventive drugs used by adults but at
reduced dosage are prescribed to children. Treatment
comparisons have been included in some recent pharma-
cological studies, with encouraging results [3].
One of the non pharmacological treatments for headache
and tension-type headache in young patients, magnesium,
proved to be successfully used [4].
Gingkolide B, a natural anti platelet activating factor
(PAF) is an herbal constituent extract from Ginko biloba
tree leaves. PAF has proved to be a strong pro inflamma-
tory and nociceptive agent released during inflammatory
process. Moreover, Gingkolide B modulates the action of
glutamate acid, the main excitatory neurotransmitter of
CNS. Migraine aura and spreading depression can be
caused by abnormal levels of glutamate in susceptible
individuals and the PAF released from platelets and
S. Usai (&)  L. Grazzi  G. Bussone
Department of Neurological Sciences, Headache Unit,
Neurological Institute ‘‘C. Besta’’ IRCCS Foundation,
Via Celoria, 11, 20133 Milan, Italy
e-mail: susanna.usai@istituto-besta.it
123
Neurol Sci (2011) 32 (Suppl 1):S197–S199
DOI 10.1007/s10072-011-0522-7
leukocytes during the first phase of migraine without aura
attacks, sensitizes the trigeminal-vascular endings inducing
pain.
In an earlier clinical report, we described our initial
attempts to assess the clinical utility of Gingkolide B in a
small group of young migraine patients [5].
Recently, some other studies have considered adminis-
tration of Gingkolide B as preventive treatment in primary
headache in young patients [6].
By considering the studies of D’Andrea [7] in adult
population and the encouraging results of our preliminary
study, we decided to treat a larger group of adolescents
with Gingkolide B, to confirm the long-term utility on a
group of young patients suffering from migraine without
aura.
Patients and methods
For this open-label prospective trial, we enrolled a small
sample of 30 young patients suffering from migraine
without aura, according to International Headache Society
criteria [8]. All patients were recruited at the Headache
Center of C. Besta Neurological Institute. Inclusion criteria
were: age between 8 and 18 years, initial onset of migraine
at least 1 year before and at least four migraine attacks
(4 days/headache/month) each of the 3 months prior to the
screening. Exclusion criteria were: neurological or psy-
chiatric diseases, neuroleptic or antidepressive medication
within 6 months before screening, intake of prophylactic
medication for migraine in the 6 months before screening,
and medication overuse.
They were treated with a combination of Gingkolide B
80 mg, coenzyme Q10 20 mg, vitamin B2 1.6 mg and
magnesium 300 mg in oral administration twice per day, in
the morning and in the evening, with meals, for 3 months.
Number, duration and severity of migraine attacks and
analgesic intake were assessed in a diary card 1 month
before the starting of the trial and during the treatment
period. After 3 months, all patients were checked with their
daily card for number, duration, severity headache episodes
and analgesic consumption. Follow-up sessions were
planned for 3, 6, and 12 months after screening visit.
Results
A total of 30 patients (18 females and 12 males; mean age
was 13.5 ± 2.2) entered the study. Mean duration of illness
was 3.4 ± 2.4 years. The mean number of days of head-
ache per month was 8.7 ± 7; the mean number of medi-
cations/month was 5.2 ± 4.4.
Twenty-three patients (76.6%) achieved the 12-month
follow-up, and seven patients never came to the first treat-
ment appointment. The number of monthly migraine attacks
was substantially reduced after 3 months of treatment with
Gingkolide B in relation to pre study baseline. Starting with
mean baseline of 7.2 ± 4.3 attacks, clinical improvement
was significant at 1-year follow-up: the mean number of
days of headache per month decreased to 1.6 ± 1.7
(p 0.000), with a decrease of number of analgesics used for
the attacks from 5.2 ± 4.7 to 0.8 ± 1.4 (p 0.000).
The treatment was well tolerated and the compliance
was good: patients (and parents too) reported substantial
improvement of their migraine compared to the situation
prior to the study. None of the patients reported worsening
of migraine.
Conclusion
Data regarding this small group of children with primary
headache confirm that Gingkolide B seems to be effective
as preventive treatment in reducing migraine attack
frequency and in attenuating the use of symptomatic
medication.
It is not yet very clear how Gingkolide B improved
migraine in young age and also the mechanism of action of
Gingkolide B on the CNS. It is believed that the main
therapeutical effect may be due to the modulation and/or
reducing the excitatory effect of glutamate in the CNS, and
glutamate is involved in spreading depression [9]. Another
effect of Gingkolide B is to hinder the pathological action
of PAF that during some physiopathological circumstances
in CNS sensitizes the trigeminal-vascular endings and
induces pain [10].
Despite the uncontrolled open-label design of this study
and the small sample of patients, these results indicate that
this treatment could be a good option for patients suffering
from migraine without aura in particular for young patients
where therapies without side effects are needed.
Conflict of interest The authors declare that there is no actual or
potential conflict of interest in relation to this article.
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which per-
mits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
References
1. Powers SW, Patton SR, Hommel KA, Hershey AD (2003)
Quality of life in childhood migraines: clinical impact and
comparison to other chronic illnesses. Pediatrics 112:e1–e5
S198 Neurol Sci (2011) 32 (Suppl 1):S197–S199
123
2. Abu-Arefeh I, Russel G (1994) Prevalence of headache and
migraine in schoolchildren. BMJ 309:765–769
3. Andrasik F, Grazzi L, Usai S, Bussone G (2007) Pharmacological
treatment compared to behavioural treatment for juvenile tension-
type headache: results at two-year follow-up. Neurol Sci 28(Suppl 2):
S235–S238
4. Grazzi L, Andrasik F, Usai S, Bussone G (2007) Magnesium as a
preventive treatment for paediatric episodic tension-type head-
ache: results at 1-year follow-up. Neurol Sci 28:148–150
5. Usai S, Grazzi L, Andrasik F, Bussone G (2010) An innovative
approach for migraine prevention in young age: a preliminary
study. Neurol Sci 31(Suppl 1):S181
6. Esposito M, Carotenuto M et al (2011) Ginkgolide B complex
efficacy for brief prophylaxis of migraine in school-aged
children: an open-label study. Neurol Sci 32:79–81
7. D’Andrea G, Bussone G, Allais G, Aguggia M, D’Onofrio F,
Maggio M, Moschiano F, Saracco MG, Terzi MG, Petretta V,
Benedetto C (2009) Efficacy of Ginkgolide B in the prophylaxis
of migraine with aura. Neurol Sci 30(Suppl 1):S121–S124
8. Headache Classification Subcommittee of the International
Headache Society (2004) The International Classification of
Headache Disorders Cephalalgia 24(Suppl 1):1–152
9. Bryn W, Coran MH, Coran MH, Schultz PG, Rimbach G,
Krucker T (2004) Age-related effect of Ginkgo Biloba on syn-
aptic plasticity and excitability. Neurobiol Aging 25:955–962
10. Nogami K, Hirashima Y, Endo S, Takaku A (1997) Involvement
of platelet-activating factor (PAF) in glutamate neurotoxicity in
rat neuronal cultures. Brain Res 754:72–78
Neurol Sci (2011) 32 (Suppl 1):S197–S199 S199
123
