UC Davis
UC Davis Previously Published Works
Title
Diverse Phytochemicals and Bioactivities in the Ancient Fruit and Modern Functional Food 
Pomegranate (Punica granatum).
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8820x84p
Journal
Molecules (Basel, Switzerland), 22(10)
ISSN
1420-3049
Authors
Wu, Sheng
Tian, Li
Publication Date
2017-09-25
DOI
10.3390/molecules22101606
 
Peer reviewed
eScholarship.org Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California
molecules
Review
Diverse Phytochemicals and Bioactivities in the
Ancient Fruit and Modern Functional Food
Pomegranate (Punica granatum)
Sheng Wu 1,2 and Li Tian 1,2,3,* ID
1 Shanghai Key Laboratory of Plant Functional Genomics and Resources, Shanghai Chenshan
Botanical Garden, Shanghai 201602, China; wusheng@mail.sioc.ac.cn
2 Shanghai Chenshan Plant Science Research Center, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 201602, China
3 Department of Plant Sciences, University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA
* Correspondence: ltian@ucdavis.edu; Tel.: +1-530-752-0940
Received: 25 August 2017; Accepted: 21 September 2017; Published: 25 September 2017
Abstract: Having served as a symbolic fruit since ancient times, pomegranate (Punica granatum) has
also gained considerable recognition as a functional food in the modern era. A large body of literature
has linked pomegranate polyphenols, particularly anthocyanins (ATs) and hydrolyzable tannins (HTs),
to the health-promoting activities of pomegranate juice and fruit extracts. However, it remains unclear
as to how, and to what extent, the numerous phytochemicals in pomegranate may interact and exert
cooperative activities in humans. In this review, we examine the structural and analytical information
of the diverse phytochemicals that have been identified in different pomegranate tissues, to establish
a knowledge base for characterization of metabolite profiles, discovery of novel phytochemicals, and
investigation of phytochemical interactions in pomegranate. We also assess recent findings on the
function and molecular mechanism of ATs as well as urolithins, the intestinal microbial derivatives
of pomegranate HTs, on human nutrition and health. A better understanding of the structural
diversity of pomegranate phytochemicals as well as their bioconversions and bioactivities in humans
will facilitate the interrogation of their synergistic/antagonistic interactions and accelerate their
applications in dietary-based cancer chemoprevention and treatment in the future.
Keywords: anthocyanin; ellagic acid; ellagitannin; functional food; hydrolyzable tannin; polyphenol;
pomegranate; Punica granatum; urolithin
1. Introduction
Cultivation and consumption of pomegranate (Punica granatum) can be dated back to at least
3000 BC. Historically, pomegranate has served as a symbol of fertility and prosperity. In addition,
various parts of the pomegranate have been used in traditional medicine for treating a wide variety of
illness. Pomegranate fruits have purported use for expelling parasites [1], seeds and fruit peels for
treating diarrhea [2,3], flowers for managing diabetes [4], tree barks and roots for stopping bleeding and
healing ulcers [5], and leaves for controlling inflammation and treating digestive system disorders [5].
Due to its reported benefits to human health, the pomegranate has drawn great interest from the
consumers in recent years. Nowadays, the pomegranate is used for functional food ingredients and
dietary supplements in various forms, such as fresh fruit and juice, powdered capsules and tablets that
contain extracts of different pomegranate tissues, tea brewed from pomegranate leaves, jam, jelly, juice
and wine produced from pomegranate fruits, as well as spices prepared from dried seeds [6].
With the advancement of technologies and the expansion of experimental inquiries into the
bioactivities of pomegranate phytochemicals, many new discoveries have been made in this ancient
fruit within the last decade. To date, over 1500 articles have been published on the subject
Molecules 2017, 22, 1606; doi:10.3390/molecules22101606 www.mdpi.com/journal/molecules
Molecules 2017, 22, 1606 2 of 17
“pomegranate”, of which 1259 articles were published between 2006 and 2016. Although the
pomegranate produces and accumulates a wide variety of phytochemicals with diverse structures in
different tissues (Table 1), investigative efforts thus far have been given mainly to the bioactivities of
polyphenols in pomegranate fruits, in particular anthocyanins (ATs) and hydrolyzable tannins (HTs),
which are assessed in this review. Specifically, various health-promoting activities of urolithins, a group
of phenolic metabolites transformed from ellagic acid (EA) (a hydrolysis product of pomegranate
ellagitannins (ETs)) by the human gut microbiota, will be reviewed.
Development of cutting-edge analytical techniques has enabled the acquisition of large-scale
metabolic datasets, which requires careful analysis and interpretation. To facilitate characterization of
metabolite profiling data in pomegranate, we examine the phytochemicals that have been identified
in pomegranate, including detailed information on the chemical structures, molecular formulas,
molecular weights, analytical methods (reflecting confidence/accuracy of the identifications), and
tissues of identification (Tables 1 and S1). Knowledge of phytochemicals present in different
pomegranate tissues will also help assess the structural determinants of their bioactivities as well as
the additive, antagonistic or synergistic interactions of these phytochemicals in complex mixtures.
Table 1. Different classes of phytochemicals identified from pomegranate. Detailed descriptions of the
chemical structures, molecular formulas, molecular weights, tissues of identification, and representative
references are presented in Supplementary Table S1.
Classes Phytochemicals
Ellagitannins,
gallotannins and
derivatives
Brevifolin, Brevifolin carboxylic acid, Brevifolin carboxylic acid 10-monopotassium sulphate, Castalagin,
Casuariin, Casuarinin, Corilagin, Isocorilagin, Hippomanin A, Gemin D, Diellagic acid rhamnosyl(1→4)
glucopyranoside, 1,2-Di-O-galloyl-4,6-O-(S)-hexahydroxydiphenoyl β-D-glucopyranoside, Ellagic acid,
3,3′-Di-O-methylellagic acid, 3,3′,4′-Tri-O-methylellagic acid, 3-O-Methylellagic acid, 4,4′-Di-O-methylellagic
acid, 3′-O-Methyl-3,4-methylenedioxy-ellagic acid, Eschweilenol C (Ellagic acid 4-O-α-L-rhamnopyranoside),
Ethyl brevifolincarboxylate, Eucalbanin B, Eucarpanin T1, Pomegraniin A, Pomegraniin B, Gallagic acid,
Gallic acid 3-O-β-D-(6′-O-galloyl)-glucopyranoside, 6-O-Galloyl-2,3-(S)-hexahydroxydiphenoyl-D-glucose,
5-Galloylpunicacortein D, 2-O-Galloylpunicalin (2-O-Galloyl-4,6-(S,S)-gallagyl-D-glucose), Granatin A,
Granatin B, 2,3-(S)-Hexahydroxydiphenoyl-D-glucose, Lagerstannin B, Lagerstannin C, 3-O-Methylellagic
acid 4-O-α-L-rhamnopyranoside, 3,4′-O-Dimethylellagic acid 4-O-α-L-rhamnopyranoside, Oenothein B,
Pedunculagin I, Pedunculagin II, 1,2,3,4,6-Penta-O-galloyl-β-D-glucose, 3,4,8,9,10-Pentahydroxydibenzo [b,d]
pyran-6-one (Urolithin M-5), Phyllanthusiin E, Pomegranatate, Punicacortein A, Punicacortein B,
Punicacortein C, Punicacortein D, Punicafolin, Punicalagin A, Punicalagin B, Punicalin, Punicatannin A,
Punicatannin B, Punigluconin, Strictinin [1-O-Galloyl-4,6-(S)-hexahydroxydiphenoyl-D-glucose],
Tellimagrandin I, Tercatain [1,4-Di-O-galloyl-3,6-(R)-hexahydroxydiphenoyl-β-glucopyranose], Terminalin
(Gallagyl dilactone), 1,2,4,6-Tetra-O-galloyl-β-D-glucose, 1,2,3-Tri-O-galloyl-β-glucopyranose,
1,2,4-Tri-O-galloyl-β-glucopyranose, 1,2,6-Tri-O-galloyl-β-glucopyranose,
1,3,4-Tri-O-galloyl-β-glucopyranose, 1,4,6-Tri-O-galloyl-β-glucopyranose,
3,4,6-Tri-O-galloyl-β-glucopyranose, Valoneic acid dilactone
Flavonoids
Hovetrichoside C, Phloretin, Phlorizin, Eriodictyol-7-O-α-L-arabinofuranosyl (1-6)-β-D-glucoside,
Granatumflavanyl xyloside, Naringin (Naringenin-7-O-rhamnoglucoside), Naringenin-4′methyl ether
7-O-α-L-arabinofuranosyl(1-6)-β-D-glucoside, Pinocembrin, Punicaflavanol, Apigenin, Apigenin
4′-O-β-glucopyranoside, Luteolin, Luteolin 3′-O-β-glucopyranoside, Luteolin 4′-O-β-glucopyranoside,
Cynaroside (Luteolin 7-O-glycoside), Luteolin 3′-O-β-xylopyranoside, Tricetin, Daidzein, Genistein,
Amurensin (Noricaritin 7-β-D-glucopyranoside), Kaempferol, Astragalin (Kaempferol 3-O-glucoside),
Kaempferol-3-O-rhamnoglucoside, Myricetin, Phellatin, Quercetin, Hirsutrin (Quercetin-3-O-glucoside),
Quercimeritrin (Quercetin-7-O-glucoside), Quercetin 3-O-rhamnoside, Rutin (Quercetin-3-O-rutinoside),
Quercetin-3,4′-dimethyl ether 7-O-α-L-arabinofuranosyl(1-6)-β-D-glucoside, Cyanidin, Chrysanthemin
(Cyanidin-3-O-glucoside), Cyanin (Cyanidin-3,5-di-O-glucoside), Antirrhinin (Cyanidin-3-O-rutinoside),
Catechin-cyanidin-3-hexoside, Delphinidin, Myrtillin (Delphinidin-3-O-glucoside),
Delphinidin-3,5-di-O-glucoside, Pelargonidin, Callistephin (Pelargonidin-3-O-glucoside), Pelargonin
(Pelargonidin-3,5-di-O-glucoside), Catechin, Epicatechin, Epicatechin gallate, Epigallocatechin-3-O-gallate,
Gallocatechin-(4→8)-catechin, Gallocatechin-(4→8)-gallocatechin, Catechin-(4→8)-gallocatechin,
Procyanidin A2, Procyanidin B1, Procyanidin B2, Procyanidin B3
Lignans Conidendrin, Isohydroxymatairesinol, Isolariciresinol, Matairesinol, Medioresinol, Phylligenin, Pinoresinol,Secoisolariciresinol, Syringaresinol, Pomegralignan, Punicatannin C
Triterpenoids
and phytosterols
Asiatic acid, Betulinic acid (Betulic acid), Friedooleanan-3-one (Friedelin), Maslinic acid, Oleanolic acid,
Punicanolic acid, Ursolic acid, Campesterol, Cholesterol, Daucosterol, β-Sitosterol, β-Sitosterol laurate,
β-Sitosterol myristate, Stigmasterol
Molecules 2017, 22, 1606 3 of 17
Table 1. Cont.
Classes Phytochemicals
Fatty acids and
lipids
Caproic acid (Hexanoic acid), Caprylic acid (Octanoic acid), Capric acid (Decanoic acid), Lauric acid
(Dodecanoic acid), Myristic acid (Tetradecanoic acid), Myristoleic acid (9-cis-Tetradecanoic acid), Palmitic
acid (Hexadecanoic acid), Palmitoleic acid (Hexadec-9-enoic acid), Punicic acid (9Z, 11E, 13Z-octadecatrienoic
acid), Linoleic acid (cis, cis-9,12-Octadecadienoic acid), α-Linolenic acid (All-cis-9,12,15-octadecatrienoic acid),
γ-Linolenic acid (All-cis-6,9,12-octadecatrienoic acid), Oleic acid (9Z-octadecenoic acid), Stearic acid
(Octadecanoic acid), α-Eleostearic acid (9Z, 11E, 13E-octadecatrienoic acid), β-Eleostearic acid (9E, 11E,
13E-octadecatrienoic acid), Catalpic acid (9E, 11E, 13Z-octadecatrienoic acid), Arachidic acid (Eicosanoic
acid), Gadoleic acid (9Z-icosenoic acid), Behenic acid (Docosanoic acid), Nervonic acid (cis-15-Tetracosenoic
acid), 1-O-9E,11Z,13E-Octadecatrienoyl glycerol, 1-O-Isopentyl-3-O-octadec-2-enoyl glycerol,
Tri-O-punicylglycerol, Di-O-punicyl-O-octadeca-8Z, 11Z, 13E-trienylglycerol, N-palmitoyl cerebroside
Organic acids
and phenolic
acids
Ascorbic acid, Citric acid, Fumaric acid, L-Malic acid, Oxalic acid, Quinic acid, Succinic acid, Tartaric acid,
Caffeic acid, Chlorogenic acid, Cinnamic acid, o-Coumaric acid, p-Coumaric acid, cis-p-Coumaric acid,
Coutaric acid, 7,8-Dihydroxy-3-carboxymethylcoumarin-5-carboxylic acid, Ferulic acid, Gallic acid, Methyl
gallate, Neochlorogenic acid (5-O-Caffeoylquinic acid), Protocatechuic acid, Vanillic acid, Coniferyl
9-O-[β-D-apiofuranosyl(1→6)]-O-β-D-glucopyranoside, Sinapyl
9-O-[β-D-apiofuranosyl(1→6)]-O-β-D-glucopyranoside
Other
compounds Catechol, Coumestrol, Icariside D1, Phenylethylrutinoside, Syringaldehyde
2. Occurrence and Structure of Diverse Phytochemicals in Pomegranate
Numerous phytochemicals have been (tentatively) identified in different pomegranate tissues
using diode array detection (DAD), electron spin resonance (ESR), fluorescence detection (FD), flame
ionization detection (FID), infrared spectroscopy (IR), mass spectrometry (MS), nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR), and thin layer chromatography (TLC; by comparing the Rf values of pomegranate
phytochemicals to those of the authentic standards) (Tables 1 and S1). It should be noted that
disparities regarding the presence/absence of phytochemicals in specific tissues have been observed
in different pomegranate cultivars [7–10]. In addition, the quantities of phytochemicals vary among
the pomegranate cultivars [11].
2.1. Ellagitannins, Gallotannins, and Their Derivatives
HTs are among the most studied phytochemicals in pomegranate; they can be further grouped
into ETs and gallotannins (GTs) based on the different phenolic acids that are esterified to the core
cyclic polyol molecule (it is often a glucose molecule). Overall, more than 60 HTs have been identified
from pomegranate using MS and/or NMR (Table 1). Pomegranate fruit peel is rich in HTs, particularly
ETs. Punicalagin isomers (ETs) constitute up to 85% (w/w) of total tannins extracted from pomegranate
fruit peel [12]. EA, methylated EA, and their glycosidic derivatives have also been found in fruit peel
and other pomegranate tissues (Table 1). Although punicalagin isomers represent the major ETs in
pomegranate roots, they accumulate at much lower levels in roots than fruit peel [13].
Besides fruit peel, pomegranate stem barks are also abundant in HTs and have been used
historically in tanneries for making leather. In addition to the HTs identified in fruit peel, stem
barks also contain ET C-glycosides, punicacorteins A–D (ETs with a gallagic acid component), and
punigluconin (an ET with a gluconic acid core) [14]. The dense inner part of pomegranate tree
trunk (i.e., heartwood) contains brevifolin carboxylic acid, EA rutinoside, diellagic acid rutinoside,
methyl-EA, methyl-EA rutinoside, punicalin, galloylpunicalin, and galloylpunicacortein D [15–17].
The composition of HTs in pomegranate leaves is largely different from that in fruit peel. In leaves,
the major HTs are granatins A and B, whereas punicalagins and punicalins are present at negligible
levels [18]. Additional ETs with galloyl and/or hexahydroxydiphenoyl (HHDP) substitutions have
also been identified in leaves [18–20]. Interestingly, derivatives of EA and ETs, including urolithin M-5,
brevifolin, and brevifolin carboxylic acid, have been isolated from pomegranate leaves [19].
In pomegranate flowers, EA and two oxidized derivatives of EA, pomegranatate and
phyllanthusiin E, were discovered [21]. Punicatannins A and B, two ETs that contain an unusual
3-oxol,3,3a,8b-tetrahydrofuro[3,4-b]benzofuran functional group, together with a structurally related
Molecules 2017, 22, 1606 4 of 17
compound isocorilagin, were also found in pomegranate flowers [22]. In addition, brevifolin
carboxylic acid, ethylbrevifolin carboxylate, as well as glucose with various galloyl and/or HHDP
substitutions, including hippomanin A, gemin D, digalloyl-diHHDP-glucose, trigalloyl glucose, and
gallic acid 3-O-β-D-(6′-O-galloyl)-glucopyranoside showed measurable accumulations in pomegranate
flowers [21,23,24].
2.2. Flavonoids
Pomegranate fruit peel, aril, and juice are abundant in flavonoids of diverse structures, including
the aglycones and glycosides of chalcones, flavanones, flavones, flavonols, ATs, flavan-3-ols, and
procyanidins (Table 1). Two flavones, luteolin and tricetin, were found in a methanolic extract of
pomegranate flowers [23]. Structures of two flavanones, punicaflavanol (a misnomer; it is a flavanone)
and granatumflavanyl xyloside, were elucidated by NMR [25], while hovetrichoside C (a glycoside
of an auronol) and phlorizin (a glycoside of the dihydrochalone phloretin) were identified by IR in
pomegranate flowers [24].
Similar to other plants, leaves of pomegranate also accumulate high levels of flavone (e.g., apigenin
and luteolin) glycosides [19]. Two flavanone diglycosides and one flavonol diglycoside isolated from
pomegranate stem barks were shown to be eriodictyol-7-O-α-L-arabinofuranosyl(1-6)-β-D-glucoside,
naringenin-4′methyl ether 7-O-α-L-arabinofuranosyl(1-6)-β-D-glucoside, and quercetin-3,4′-dimethyl
ether 7-O-α-L-arabinofuranosyl(1-6)-β-D-glucoside, respectively, by NMR analysis [26,27].
High performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)-DAD studies revealed that two isoflavones,
genistein and daidzein, as well as a flavonol quercetin, are present in pomegranate seeds [9,28].
2.3. Lignans
Plant lignans are a group of phytoestrogens that can be metabolized into mammalian lignans by
the gut microbiota. Furofuran-, dibenzylbutane-, and dibenzylbutyrolactone-type lignans have been
identified in different pomegranate tissues based on liquid chromatography (LC)-MSn studies (Table 1),
while isolariciresinol is the most abundant lignan present in pomegranate fruit peel [29]. In addition to
the above-mentioned lignans, pomegralignan, a dihydrobenzofuran-type neolignan glycoside, was
discovered in the aril and fruit peel of pomegranate [30]. Another neolignan, punnicatannin C, was
isolated from pomegranate flowers and structurally characterized by NMR analysis [24].
2.4. Triterpenoids and Phytosterols
Triterpenoids (C30) are the biosynthetic precursors of steroids in plants (phytosterols) and animals
(steroid hormones). Triterpenoids and phytosterols have been found in pomegranate seed, leaf,
flower, fruit peel, and bark tissues (Table 1). The presence of human steroid hormones, including
estrone, estriol, estradiol, and testosterone, in pomegranate seeds was reported previously based on
TLC separations and colorimetric assays [31,32]. However, HPLC-DAD- and gas chromatography
(GC)-MS-based analysis showed that these steroid hormones could not be identified in pomegranate
seeds using the more sensitive analytical methods [33].
2.5. Alkaloids and Indolamines
Pelletierine, pseudopelletierine, and N-methylpelletierine comprise the major alkaloids
in pomegranate stem and root barks [34]. Sedridine, 2-(2′-hydroxypropyl)-∆1piperideine,
2-(2′-propenyl)-∆1piperideine, norpseudopelletierine, and the pyrrolidine alkaloids (with a five-membered
N-containing ring) hygrine and norhygrine, were also found in root barks at low quantities [34].
In addition to the alkaloids that accumulate in root and stem barks, N-(2′,5′-dihydroxyphenyl)pyridinium
chloride was identified in pomegranate leaves [19], and a pyrrolidine-type alkaloid punigratane
(2,5-diheptyl-N-methylpyrrolidine) was recently characterized in pomegranate fruit peel [35]. Besides
alkaloids, low levels of indolamines (amine derivatives of indole), including tryptamine, melatonin,
and serotonin, were present in the extract of pomegranate fruit [36].
Molecules 2017, 22, 1606 5 of 17
2.6. Fatty Acids and Lipids
Fatty acids (FAs) of medium (C6, C8, C10, and C12), long (C14, C16, C18, and C20), and very long
(C22 and C24) chain length have been identified from pomegranate seeds, juice, and fruit using GC-FID,
MS, or NMR analysis (Table 1). The polyunsaturated FA punicic acid (9Z, 11E, 13Z-octadecatrienoic
acid) represents the most abundant FA in pomegranate seeds, accounting for over 60% of seed oil.
Triacylglycerols (TAGs) containing 9E, 11Z, 13E-octadecatrienoic acid, 3-O-octadec-2-enoic acid, 9Z,
11E, 13Z-octadecatrienoic acid, and 8Z, 11Z, 13E-octadecatrienoic acid are produced in pomegranate
seeds and their structures were determined by NMR [37–39]. In addition, a glycosphingolipid
N-palmitoyl cerebroside was identified from pomegranate (cv. Nana) seed oil by TLC and GC-FID
analyses [40].
2.7. Organic Acids and Phenolic Acids
The major organic acids in pomegranate juice are citric acid and malic acid [41]. Pomegranate
juice also contains ascorbic acid, fumaric acid, oxalic acid, quinic acid, succinic acid, and tartaric acid,
some of which have also been identified in the leaf, fruit peel, and seed tissues [8,9,41–43]. Phenolic
acids (aromatic acids), primarily benzoic acid and cinnamic acid derivatives, are usually found in
pomegranate fruit peel, juice, and flowers (Table 1). In addition, the structure of a substituted coumarin,
7,8-dihydroxy-3-carboxymethylcoumarin-5-carboxylic acid, was characterized in pomegranate flowers
by NMR [24].
2.8. Other Compounds
Phenolic compounds that do not belong to HTs, flavonoids, and phenolic acids were also
identified in pomegranate juice and seeds using DAD and MS (Table 1). These include catechol
(a dihydroxybenzene), coumestrol (a coumestan), syringaldehyde (an aromatic aldehyde), as well as
icariside D1 and phenylethylrutinoside (two phenylethanoid glycosides) [28,41,43,44].
3. Interactions of Pomegranate Phytochemicals
The synergy principle of phytochemicals has long been employed in traditional herbal medicine.
Multi-target drugs derived from mixtures of plant natural products have increasingly been pursued
nowadays to contradict drug tolerance and resistance in cancer therapy. Although several studies
(discussed below) have suggested synergistic interactions among pomegranate phytochemicals, this is
a promising, but currently under-explored topic.
Fresh arils and juice products of pomegranate fruit, as well as seeds of the soft-seeded cultivars,
are mostly consumed. Phytochemicals in pomegranate fruit peel extracts, fermented pomegranate
juice, and pomegranate seed oil exhibited cooperative interactions toward limiting the proliferation,
metastasis, and invasiveness of human prostate cancer cells in vitro [45]. A subsequent analysis with
pure phytochemicals, including EA, caffeic acid, luteolin, and punicic acid, also showed synergistic
interactions on suppressing the invasion of prostate cancer cells [46]. Interestingly, commercial
pomegranate juice demonstrated more antioxidant and anti-proliferative activities than the purified
pomegranate polyphenols in colon cancer cells, suggesting that inherent synergies exist among
polyphenols and other phytochemicals in pomegranate juice [47].
When the commercial pomegranate-nectarine juice was separated into predominately sugar,
organic acid, neutral phenol, and AT fractions, complex antagonistic or synergistic effects
were observed among different fractions on the total phenol or total antioxidant content [48].
The antagonistic or synergistic interactions depended on the concentrations of the chemical constituents
in the juice product [49]. The polyphenol extracts of pomegranate fruit also synergistically interacted
with the antibacterial drug ciprofloxacin, though various bacterial strains responded differently to the
phytochemical-drug synergy, and the underlying mechanism of such synergy remains unknown [50].
Molecules 2017, 22, 1606 6 of 17
4. Functions of Pomegranate ATs in Human Nutrition and Health
ATs are colorful, water-soluble polyphenol pigments that are found in many plant foods, such
as berries and pomegranate fruits. Plant ATs are often investigated collectively as a group of
phytochemicals for their bioactivities, and have been linked to many aspects of human disease
prevention and treatment [51–56]. The anti-inflammatory and cardioprotective activities of ATs
are attributed by their antioxidant properties via various underlying mechanisms [51]. ATs can
quench free radicals, inhibit the activity of xanthine oxidase that generates free radicals, and chelate
metal ions that are involved in oxidation of low-density lipoproteins (LDLs) [57]. In addition, ATs
induce the expression of nuclear factor-erythroid 2-related factor-2 (Nrf2) that regulates the expression
of endogenous antioxidant enzymes, such as hemeoxygenase-1 (HO-1) [51,55]. Besides reactive
oxygen species (ROS), ATs also inhibit the production of reactive nitrogen species (RNS), particularly
nitric oxide (NO), as well as their associated oxidative processes [58]. Furthermore, release of
pro-inflammatory mediators and adhesion molecules is suppressed by ATs via targeting of the
respective signaling pathways, e.g., the arachidonic acid and the tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α,
nuclear factor (NF)-κB pathways [59,60].
Aside from cardioprotection, the anti-inflammatory property of ATs also contributes to their
anti-obesity effect and action in adipose tissue [53]. Studies using AT-rich fruit extracts showed that
ATs prevented the upregulation of inflammatory response in adipose tissue, when triggered with
consumption of a high-fat diet, by regulating the NF-κB stress signaling pathway [61]. ATs also
reduce the level of pro-inflammatory cytokines (mediators of cell-to-cell communications in immune
response) [62] and modulate the expression of adipocytokines (mediators linking adipose tissue,
inflammation and immunity) [62,63]. Although studies using cell lines and animal models support
the anti-obesity effect of ATs, a causal relationship between AT consumption and reduction of body
mass index has yet to be conclusively established by clinical studies [64]. This could be due to one or
more parameters that are associated with different clinical studies, such as the amount and types of
ATs ingested, the food matrix of ATs, and the inherent difference of the study subjects (e.g., different
age groups of the participants) [53].
In addition to their antioxidant and anti-inflammatory activities, ATs act in cancer chemoprevention
by inducing terminal differentiation of tumor cells and thus impeding tumorigenesis [65]. Prevention
of malignant cell transformation and inhibition of cancer cell proliferation by ATs have also been
reported [66]. ATs can further interfere with cancer development by activating caspases and inducing
apoptosis of cancer cells [67]. However, the cancer chemotherapeutic effect of ATs still requires strong
supporting evidence from clinical studies. In addition, the bioconversion of ATs by human intestinal
microbiome should be rigorously investigated.
Similar to other AT-rich fruits, the pomegranate also has a cardioprotective effect by targeting two
major causal factors of atherosclerotic lesion and cardiovascular disease, namely the accumulation
of cholesterol and oxidized lipids, and arterial macrophage foam cell formation [6]. Pomegranate
juice and fruit extracts are also associated with antidiabetic activities, largely due to the antioxidant
properties of HTs and ATs in reducing oxidative stress and lipid peroxidation [4]. Supplements of
pomegranate juice or fruit extracts (including juice, fruit peel and seeds) at 1 g/kg/day for five
weeks, effectively enhanced endothelial NO synthase (eNOS) expression, as well as plasma nitrate
and nitrite (end products of NO) levels in plasma in obese Zucker rats fed with an atherogenic
diet [68]. In addition, supplements of juice (extracted from pomegranate arils) at 100 mg/kg/day or
300 mg/kg/day for four weeks prevented the development of high blood pressure in diabetic rats [69].
Consumption of pomegranate juice rich in ATs and HTs also lowered systolic and diastolic blood
pressure in hypertensive patients [70].
The bioactivities of pomegranate ATs have mostly been studied in the context of pomegranate
juice and fruit extracts. However, these AT-rich sources are abundant in vitamin C, carotenoids, and
HTs, which can also contribute to the ascribed bioactivities. To this end, “white” (AT-less) pomegranate
cultivars are available, which lack the accumulation of ATs in leaves, fruits (including peels and arils)
Molecules 2017, 22, 1606 7 of 17
and flowers [71,72]. Comparative analysis of the white and AT-rich pomegranate cultivars will be
informative as to the specific role of ATs in the health-promoting activities of pomegranate juice and
fruit extracts.
5. Roles of Urolithins, the ET-Derived Metabolites, in Human Nutrition and Health
ETs are abundant in pomegranate fruit peel, as well as juice and extracts that are produced
commercially from the whole fruit. Besides pomegranate, ETs are also present in a wide range of
medicinal and food plants, such as many berries, nuts, and herbs [73,74]. As such, the knowledge of
biotransformation and bioconversion of pomegranate ETs by human and microbial enzymes (discussed
in this section) will inform nutritional and pharmacological studies on ETs that are isolated from
other plants.
EA, a hydrolysis product of ETs (Figure 1A), can be detected (at a maximum concentration of
0.06 µM) in the blood circulation of healthy volunteers within half an hour of ingesting pomegranate
juice or extracts [75]. The human gut microbiota can further convert EA into urolithins prior to their
absorption by the intestinal cells. It was shown that urolithin concentrations reached up to 18.6 µM in
the plasma of healthy volunteers after consuming pomegranate juice for five consecutive days [76].Molecules 2017, 22, 1606 8 of 17 
 
 
Figure 1. Pomegranate ellagitannin-derived metabolites. (A) Punicalagin (a pomegranate 
ellagitannin) is hydrolyzed to hexahydroxydiphenic acid, which is lactonized to yield ellagic acid; (B) 
Chemical structures of representative urolithins, the microfloral transformation products of ellagic 
acid. 
5.1. Breast and Endometrial Cancers 
Aromatase that converts androgens to estrogens has been considered to be a therapeutic target 
for treating the hormone-sensitive type of breast cancer [80]. Although several urolithins (at 47 μM) 
exhibited anti-aromatase activities in a placental microsome-based enzyme assay, only UB 
competitively inhibited and most effectively suppressed the aromatase activity in an aromatase-
overexpressing breast cancer cell line (MCF-7aro) [81]. Consistent with “in cell” aromatase-inhibitory 
activity, UB also significantly arrested testosterone-induced proliferation of MCF-7aro cells, 
suggesting an underlying mechanism of aromatase inhibition. Interestingly, estrogen-induced 
proliferation of MCF-7aro cells was also inhibited by urolithins. However, inhibition was was likely 
effected through mechanisms independent of the aromatase activity [81]. 
Besides breast cancer, urolithins can also reduce the risks of another sex steroid hormone-related 
cancer, endometrial cancer. UA and UB (at 10 μM for 48 h) caused over 50% reduction in the 
proliferation of human endometrial cancer cells [82]. UA (at 10 μM and 50 μM for 48 h) arrested cell 
cycle at the G2/M phase and regulated the expression of cell cycle-related proteins at this phase. On 
the other hand, UA was shown to act as an estrogen agonist and modulate the estrogen-receptor α 
(ERα)-dependent gene expression in the ER-positive endometrial cancer cells. It remains to be 
determined whether and how estrogen signaling could be involved in the suppression of endometrial 
cancer cell growth by urolithins [82]. 
5.2. Prostate Cancer 
 
O
O O O
O
O
O
OH
OH
OH
HO OH
HO
O
O
OH
HO
HO
HO
O
O
OH
HO OH
OH
OH
OH
O
O
OH Hydrolysis OH
HO
HO
HO
OH
OHHO
O
OH
O
Lactonization
O
O
O
O
HO
HO
OH
OH
Punicalagin
Hexahydroxydiphenic acid Ellagic acid
A
O
O
HO
OH
Urolithin A
OHO
Urolithin B
O
O
HO
OH
Urolithin C
HO
O
O
HO
OH
Urolithin D
HO
OH
O
O
HO
OH
Urolithin M-5
HO
OH
OH
O
O
HO
OH
Isourolithin A
O
O
HO
Isourolithin B
O
O
O
OH
8-O-methylurolithin A
O
O
OH
O
O HO OH
COOH
OH
Urolithin A-3-O-glucuronide
B
O
Figure 1. Pomegranate ellagitannin-derived metabolites. (A) Punicalagin (a pomegranate ellagitannin)
is hydrolyzed to hexahydroxydiphenic acid, which is lactonized to yield ellagic acid; (B) Chemical
structures of representative urolithins, the microfloral transformation products of ellagic acid.
Urolithins contain a common core structure of dibenzopyranone and are more hydrophobic than
EA (Figure 1B). The icrofloral transformation of EA to urolithins likely involves cleavage of the lactone
ring of EA by an esterase, followed by removal of the carboxyl group resulted from the ring opening
by a decarboxylase, and then removal of one or more hydroxyl groups by an oxidoreductase [77].
Molecules 2017, 22, 1606 8 of 17
Urolithin A (UA), urolithin B (UB), hydroxyl-UA, UA-glucuronide, and dimethyl EA-glucuronide have
been identified in the plasma of healthy individuals after taking pomegranate extracts [78]. Additional
urolithins, such as isourolithin A (isoUA), have also been reported in human urine or stool samples [79].
Emerging experimental evidence has suggested that urolithins play a major role in the anti-cancer,
anti-inflammatory, and anti-aging activities of pomegranate fruit and products, which are discussed in
the following sections.
5.1. Breast and Endometrial Cancers
Aromatase that converts androgens to estrogens has been considered to be a therapeutic
target for treating the hormone-sensitive type of breast cancer [80]. Although several urolithins
(at 47 µM) exhibited anti-aromatase activities in a placental microsome-based enzyme assay,
only UB competitively inhibited and most effectively suppressed the aromatase activity in an
aromatase-overexpressing breast cancer cell line (MCF-7aro) [81]. Consistent with “in cell”
aromatase-inhibitory activity, UB also significantly arrested testosterone-induced proliferation of
MCF-7aro cells, suggesting an underlying mechanism of aromatase inhibition. Interestingly,
estrogen-induced proliferation of MCF-7aro cells was also inhibited by urolithins. However, inhibition
was was likely effected through mechanisms independent of the aromatase activity [81].
Besides breast cancer, urolithins can also reduce the risks of another sex steroid hormone-related
cancer, endometrial cancer. UA and UB (at 10 µM for 48 h) caused over 50% reduction in the
proliferation of human endometrial cancer cells [82]. UA (at 10 µM and 50 µM for 48 h) arrested
cell cycle at the G2/M phase and regulated the expression of cell cycle-related proteins at this phase.
On the other hand, UA was shown to act as an estrogen agonist and modulate the estrogen-receptor
α (ERα)-dependent gene expression in the ER-positive endometrial cancer cells. It remains to be
determined whether and how estrogen signaling could be involved in the suppression of endometrial
cancer cell growth by urolithins [82].
5.2. Prostate Cancer
UA (IC50 = 35.2 ± 3.7 µM), UB (IC50 > 40 µM), and urolithin C (UC; IC50 = 46.5 ± 1.6 µM)
impaired the proliferation of the “androgen-sensitive” prostate cancer cells (LNCaP) [83]. UA and
UC also attenuated the release of the prostate specific antigen (PSA) by the cancer cells, and inhibited
the activities of arginase (a hydrolase that converts arginine to ornithine and urea and is critical for
the proliferation of prostate cancer cells) [83]. Further investigations of the regulatory mechanism of
urolithins indicated that UA and UB repressed the transcription and translation of the androgen
receptor (AR), and subsequently reduced PSA transcripts and proteins in the LNCaP cells [84].
Urolithins also induced apoptosis in the LNCaP cells, which correlated with a decrease in the
anti-apoptotic B-cell lymphoma 2 (Bcl-2) proteins, an increase in the apoptotic-protective Cyclin
Dependent Kinase Inhibitor 1A (CDKN1A) transcripts and proteins, and an activation of the apoptotic
cysteine proteases caspases 3 and 7 [84,85].
Cytochrome P450 1 (CYP1) family members activate pro-carcinogens and often exhibit enhanced
expression in tumor and cancer cells [86]. UA (IC50 = 1.15 ± 0.65 µM), UB (IC50 = 1.55 ± 0.49 µM),
and methyl-UA (mUA; IC50 = 1.49 ± 0.39 µM) effectively inhibited the CYP1-mediated ethoxy
resorufin-O-deethylase (EROD) activities and were selective toward CYP1-B1 over CYP1-A1
(CYP1-B1 and CYP1-A1 are two members of the CYP1 family) in in vitro assays [87]. Incubation
with UA (IC50 = 32 ± 8.9 µM) and UB (IC50 = 38 ± 3.9 µM) also led to inhibition of the
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD)-induced CYP1 activities and decreased CYP1-B1 protein
accumulation in the “androgen-responsive” 22Rv1 prostate cancer cells. However, the anti-proliferative
effects of UC, dimethyl-UC, and mUA toward 22Rv1 cells were due to their cytotoxic activities rather
than inhibition of the TCDD-induced CYP1 expression [87].
In the “androgen-independent” DU145 and PC3 prostate cancer cell lines, EA and UA
synergistically inhibited cancer cell proliferation [88]. However, EA and UA exerted differential impacts
Molecules 2017, 22, 1606 9 of 17
on cell cycle control and induction of apoptosis in DU145 and PC3 cancer cells, suggesting that different
molecular targets may exist for these pomegranate-derived metabolites [88]. Caspase-dependent cell
apoptosis was induced in DU145 cells by mUA treatment [89]. Upon exposure to mUA (at 40 µM
or 60 µM), expression of the oncogenic microRNA-21 (miR-21) was reduced, whereas protein levels
of the miR-21 targets, including phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN), programmed cell death
4 (Pdcd4), and forkhead box O3a (FOXO3a), were elevated. In addition, the expression of protein
kinase B (Akt), as well as β-catenin and its downstream oncogenic transcription factors, was decreased
by the mUA treatment [89]. These data suggest that the mUA suppression of DU145 cell growth is
mediated by regulation of miR-21 expression and the downstream PTEN/Akt and Wnt/β-catenin
signaling pathways.
The Eph receptor-Ephrin ligand signaling system is implicated in an array of cellular processes,
such as cancer development. UC and urolithin D (UD) reduced specifically the EphA2-Ephrin-A1
interaction (this receptor-ligand pair is known to be involved in cancer development and progression)
of the Eph-Ephrin system [90]. UD acts as a protein-protein antagonist of EphA2 (a receptor kinase)
by interfering its phosphorylation mediated by Ephrin-A1, without inhibiting the kinase domain of
EphA2, and using a mechanism other than cytotoxicity or anti-proliferative effect in the PC3 human
prostate adenocarcinoma cells [90].
Overall, these studies collectively suggest that urolithins may find applications as chemo-preventive
agents against prostate cancers, through different mechanisms in androgen-sensitive, -responsive, and
-independent cells.
5.3. Colon and Bladder Cancers
The canonical Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway has been shown to activate T-cell factor
transcription and function in colon carcinogenesis [91]. To determine the potential involvement of
urolithins in colon carcinogenesis through Wnt signaling, phenolic extracts of several fruits rich in ETs,
including pomegranate, strawberry (Fragaria ananassa), and Jamun berry (Eugenia jambolana), as well
as pure EA and UA compounds, were tested in the human embryonic kidney 293T cells that express
a reconstructed canonical Wnt signaling pathway [92]. Although the fruit extracts and chemicals all
inhibited Wnt signaling, only UA exhibited an IC50 value (at 39 µM) that was physiologically relevant
in the lumen of colons when taking enterohepatic circulation of urolithins into consideration [92].
During the initiation stage of the HT-29 colon cancer cells, urolithins A–D inhibited
TCDD-induced, CYP1-mediated EROD activities [93]. At the cancer progression stage, UA and
UB (at 30 µg mL−1 for 48 h) impaired the proliferation of HT-29 cells and led to cell cycle arrest at
the G2/M phase, as well as activation of CDKN1A expression. In addition, treatment with urolithins
resulted in activation of caspases 3, 8, and 9, suggesting that urolithins induced both the extrinsic
(death receptor-mediated; where caspase 8 is activated) and intrinsic (mitochondrial mediated; where
caspase 9 is activated) apoptotic pathways in HT-29 cells [94].
UA, UB, and mUA inhibited the proliferation of the T24 human bladder cancer cells in vitro,
with IC50 values of 43.9, 35.2, and 46.3 µM, respectively [10], comparable to the UA inhibition of Wnt
signaling at an IC50 of 39 µM [92]. The transcript and protein levels of Phospho-p38 mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAP kinase; MAPK) were increased by the urolithin treatment, while those of MAP
kinase kinase kinase1 (MEKK1) and Phospho-c-Jun were decreased in the T24 cells. Furthermore,
these urolithins reduced the level of H2O2-induced oxidative stress and induced apoptosis through
activation of caspase 3 and PPAR-γ protein expression [10].
5.4. Cardiovascular Diseases
Inflammatory responses involving the activation of neutrophils and monocytes play a central
role in the development of cardiovascular diseases [95]. Intriguingly, the number of free hydroxyl
functional groups on urolithins appeared to impact how they modulate the inflammatory functions of
neutrophils [96]. Among the urolithins tested (including UA, UB, UC, mUA, and methyl-urolithin
Molecules 2017, 22, 1606 10 of 17
C/mUC), UA (with two free hydroxyl groups; at 1 µM) exhibited the most potent antioxidant activities
against the release of ROS from the pro-inflammatory triggered neutrophils. UB (with one free
hydroxyl group; at 20 µM) significantly affected several inflammatory biomarkers that are associated
with cardiovascular events, by inhibiting the production of interleukin 8 (IL8) and metalloproteinase-9
(MMP-9), and preventing the shedding of selectin CD62L triggered by the pro-inflammatory factor
cytochalasin A/formyl-met-leu-phenylalanine (f-MLP). UC (with three free hydroxyl groups; at 5 µM),
on the other hand, inhibited the release of elastase, a pro-inflammatory mediator responsible for
extracellular matrix (ECM) degradation, from the f-MLP-stimulated neutrophils [96].
In addition to recruitment of neutrophils, monocyte adhesion to endothelial cells represents
another key event in inflammatory responses [95]. A mixture of UA and UB (each at 10 µM) restricted
the adhesion of Tamm-Horsfall protein-1 (THP-1) monocytes to the human umbilical vein endothelial
cells (HUVECs) [97]. UA glucuronide (at 15 µM), but not UA, UB or UB glucuronide, inhibited
monocyte adhesion to TNFα-stimulated human aortic endothelial cells (HAECs); a dosage-dependent
inhibition of TNFα-induced migration of endothelial cells was also shown for the above-mentioned
urolithins [98].
NO plays multifaceted roles in combatting cardiovascular diseases [99]. Although UA, UB, and
UB glucuronide did not show any effect individually at 15 µM on NO bioavailability, a mixture of the
three urolithins at equal concentrations (total 15 µM) activated the expression of eNOS after a 5-min
incubation and increased NO production in primary HAECs after a 24-h incubation [100]. Overall,
these in vitro studies with neutrophils, monocytes, and NO suggested the potential anti-inflammatory
and cardiovascular-protective functions of urolithins.
5.5. Obesity
Based on the urinary excretion of urolithins by healthy volunteers after ingesting ET-rich foods or
fruit extracts, three urolithin metabolic types (metabotypes) have been defined, including A (excretes
only UA), B (excretes UA, UB, and isoUA), and 0 (does not excrete urolithins) [79]. Interestingly,
the population of the human gut bacteria Gordonibacter urolithinfaciens correlated positively with the
in vivo production of UA, but inversely with that of UB and isoUA [101]. A recent study observed
an interlinked relationship among gut dysbiosis (i.e., microbial imbalance), ET metabolism, and
obesity [102]. A relatively high percentage of metabotype B was found in the overweight-obese group,
while metabotype A had a higher presentation in the normoweight (i.e., normal weight) than the
overweight-obese group. In addition, G. urolithinfaciens levels were higher in the metabotype A than the
metabotype B individuals [102]. Further investigations should provide a mechanistic understanding
of how consuming the polyphenol precursors of urolithins, in the presence of UA-producing bacteria,
may reduce the risks of diseases associated with obesity.
Large inter-individual variations in the cardiovascular risk biomarkers were observed in healthy
overweight-obese individuals after consuming pomegranate supplement [103]. However, after
clustering the different urolithin metabotypes in these individuals, improved blood lipid profiles
were evident in the metabotype B group, in a dose-dependent fashion, while there was no significant
effect in the metabotype A group. Interestingly, several metabotype 0 (urolithin non-producers;
according to baseline analysis) individuals shifted to metabotype A or B (urolithin producers) after
consuming pomegranate extracts [103]. Together with the study by Selma et al. (2016), these results
suggest that consumption of pomegranate extracts may have personalized effects that are associated
with the gut microbiota and the urolithin metabotypes of the individuals.
5.6. Aging
Of the various pomegranate phenolic metabolites exhibiting anti-Alzheimer activities in in vitro
assays, only urolithins, including UA, UB, mUA, and methyl-urolithin B (mUB), were predicted to
be capable of crossing the blood-brain barrier [104]. Methylation of urolithins by the mammalian
enzymes may further improve their lipophilicity and facilitate the penetration of the blood-brain barrier.
Molecules 2017, 22, 1606 11 of 17
Corroborating with the computational predictions, urolithins reduced the production of the neurotoxic,
fibrillogenic β-amyloid (Aβ) peptide in vitro. Significant improvement of the survival/mobility of
Caenorhabditis elegans (post-induction by Aβ1-42 for muscular paralysis) was also achieved by mUB
treatment [104]. However, empirical evidence is still needed to verify the roles of urolithins in
preventing Alzheimer’s disease (age-related memory loss) in vivo.
Advanced protein glycation (non-enzymatic glycosylation) products have been implicated in the
development of chronic diseases, such as diabetes and Alzheimer’s disease. The inhibitory effects of
pomegranate fruit extract, punicalagin, EA, gallic acid (GA), UA, and UB toward the early, middle,
and late stage of protein glycation were compared using in vitro assays [105]. Although all phenolic
metabolites showed anti-glycation activities, pomegranate extract, punicalagin, and EA were more
effective than GA, UA, and UB in preventing the glycation of proteins by fructose [105].
The mechanistic basis underlying UA’s anti-aging activities was explored recently using C. elegans,
mammalian cells, and rodent models [106]. Feeding C. elegans with UA led to a dosage-dependent
extension of the worm’s lifespan. It was shown that UA could activate mitophagy (degradation of
mitochondria by autophagy) and eliminate damaged mitochondria in C. elegans, mammalian cells
derived from muscle or intestinal tissues, and muscles of young and old rodents. UA was also found
to be bioavailable in the skeletal muscle and could improve muscle function in mice and rats [106].
The role of urolithins in enhancing mitochondrial function and muscle quality presents promising
dietary leads (e.g., ET-rich foods) for improved mobility in the elderly population.
6. Future Perspectives
Pomegranate fruits, leaves, flowers, and seeds have all been used in traditional herbal medicine
for treating various illness. However, bioactive metabolites present in pomegranate fruit peel and
juice have received considerable more attention than those found in other tissues. Bioactivities of the
phytochemicals accumulating in tissues other than fruit should be investigated more rigorously in
the future. In addition, detailed metabolite profiling and characterization of different pomegranate
cultivars, grown under non-standard conditions (e.g., subjected to biotic and abiotic stresses), can be
carried out to explore further the phytochemical diversity in pomegranate.
Metabolic enzymes and pathways that confer the structural diversity of pomegranate phytochemicals
also warrant further investigation. For example, the production of diverse HT monomers and polymers
has been suggested to involve the activity of multiple laccase enzymes. However, the HT-forming laccases
have not been cloned and characterized from pomegranate or any other plant species. Elucidation of
the laccase family enzymes in pomegranate that bring about the great diversity of HT structures will
have broad implications in dissecting the biological functions of HTs.
In vitro assays and animal model studies have demonstrated various health benefits of urolithins,
the ET derivatives. It is critical to obtain clinically relevant data on their efficacies prior to widespread
applications in human disease interventions. Overall, exploration of the diversity and interactions of
pomegranate phytochemicals, as well as preclinical and clinical investigations of their bioactivities,
holds great promise of fully realizing the potential of this ancient fruit and modern functional food.
Since a majority of the phytochemicals identified in pomegranate have also been found in other plants,
examining the interactions and health-promoting functions of pomegranate phytochemicals will also
have a far-reaching impact on exploiting the bioactive components of various edible medicinal plants
and functional plant food.
Supplementary Materials: The following are available online, Table S1: Phytochemicals identified from different
pomegranate tissues.
Acknowledgments: We are grateful for the support provided by the Science and Technology Commission of
Shanghai Municipality (14DZ2260400), the National Science Foundation (MCB1120323 to L.T.), and the Binational
Agricultural Research and Development Fund (BARD) (IS-4822-15R to L.T.).
Author Contributions: S.W. and L.T. conceived and wrote the review.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Molecules 2017, 22, 1606 12 of 17
References
1. Dell’Agli, M.; Galli, G.V.; Corbett, Y.; Taramelli, D.; Lucantoni, L.; Habluetzel, A.; Maschi, O.; Caruso, D.;
Giavarini, F.; Romeo, S.; et al. Antiplasmodial activity of Punica granatum L. fruit rind. J. Ethnopharmacol.
2009, 125, 279–285. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2. Qnais, E.Y.; Elokda, A.S.; Abu Ghalyun, Y.Y.; Abdulla, F.A. Antidiarrheal activity of the aqueous extract of
Punica granatum (pomegranate) peels. Pharm. Biol. 2007, 45, 715–720. [CrossRef]
3. Das, A.K.; Mandal, S.C.; Banerjee, S.K.; Sinha, S.; Das, J.; Saha, B.P.; Pal, M. Studies on antidiarrhoeal activity
of Punica granatum seed extract in rats. J. Ethnopharmacol. 1999, 68, 205–208. [CrossRef]
4. Banihani, S.; Swedan, S.; Alguraan, Z. Pomegranate and type 2 diabetes. Nutr. Res. 2013, 33, 341–348.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
5. Bhowmik, D.; Gopinath, H.; Kumar, B.; Duraivel, S.; Aravind, G.; Kumar, K. Medicinal uses of Punica granatum
and its health benefits. J. Pharmacogn. Phytochem. 2013, 1, 28–35.
6. Newman, R.; Lansky, E.; Block, M. Pomegranate: The Most Medicinal Fruit; Basic Health Publications:
Laguna Beach, CA, USA, 2007.
7. Kaufman, M.; Wiesman, Z. Pomegranate oil analysis with emphasis on MALDI-TOF/MS triacylglycerol
fingerprinting. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2007, 55, 10405–10413. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
8. Melgarejo, P.; Salazar, D.M.; Artés, F. Organic acids and sugars composition of harvested pomegranate fruits.
Eur. Food Res. Technol. 2000, 211, 185–190. [CrossRef]
9. Pande, G.; Akoh, C.C. Antioxidant capacity and lipid characterization of six Georgia-grown pomegranate
cultivars. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2009, 57, 9427–9436. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
10. Qiu, Z.; Zhou, B.; Jin, L.; Yu, H.; Liu, L.; Liu, Y.; Qin, C.; Xie, S.; Zhu, F. In vitro antioxidant and
antiproliferative effects of ellagic acid and its colonic metabolite, urolithins, on human bladder cancer
T24 cells. Food Chem. Toxicol. 2013, 59, 428–437. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
11. Tzulker, R.; Glazer, I.; Bar-Ilan, I.; Holland, D.; Aviram, M.; Amir, R. Antioxidant activity, polyphenol content,
and related compounds in different fruit juices and homogenates prepared from 29 different pomegranate
accessions. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2007, 55, 9559–9570. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
12. Seeram, N.; Lee, R.; Hardy, M.; Heber, D. Rapid large scale purification of ellagitannins from pomegranate
husk, a by-product of the commercial juice industry. Sep. Purif. Technol. 2005, 41, 49–55. [CrossRef]
13. Ono, N.; Bandaranayake, P.C.G.; Tian, L. Establishment of pomegranate (Punica granatum) hairy root
cultures for genetic interrogation of the hydrolyzable tannin biosynthetic pathway. Planta 2012, 236, 931–941.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
14. Tanaka, T.; Nonaka, G.-I.; Nishioka, I. Tannins and related compounds. XLI.: Isolation and characterization
of novel ellagitannins, punicacorteins A, B, C, and D, and punigluconin from the bark of Punica granatum L.
Chem. Pharm. Bull. Tokyo 1986, 34, 656–663. [CrossRef]
15. El-Toumy, S.; Marzouk, M.; Rauwald, H. Ellagi- and gallotannins from Punica granatum heartwood. Pharmazie
2001, 56, 823–824. [PubMed]
16. El-Toumy, S.; Rauwald, H. Two new ellagic acid rhamnosides from Punica granatum heartwood. Planta Med.
2003, 69, 682–684. [PubMed]
17. El-Toumy, S.A.A.; Rauwald, H.W. Two ellagitannins from Punica granatum heartwood. Phytochemistry 2002,
61, 971–974. [CrossRef]
18. Tanaka, T.; Nonaka, G.-I.; Nishioka, I. Punicafolin, an ellagitannin from the leaves of Punica granatum.
Phytochemistry 1985, 24, 2075–2078. [CrossRef]
19. Nawwar, M.A.M.; Hussein, S.A.M.; Merfort, I. Leaf phenolics of Punica granatum. Phytochemistry 1994, 37,
1175–1177. [CrossRef]
20. Hussein, S.A.M.; Barakat, H.H.; Merfort, I.; Nawwar, M.A.M. Tannins from the leaves of Punica granatum.
Phytochemistry 1997, 45, 819–823. [CrossRef]
21. Wang, R.; Wei, W.; Wang, L.; Liu, R.; Yi, D.; Du, L. Constituents of the flowers of Punica granatum. Fitoterapia
2006, 77, 534–537. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
22. Yuan, T.; Ding, Y.; Wan, C.; Li, L.; Xu, J.; Liu, K.; Slitt, A.; Ferreira, D.; Khan, I.A.; Seeram, N.P. Antidiabetic
ellagitannins from pomegranate flowers: Inhibition of α-glucosidase and lipogenic gene expression. Org. Lett.
2012, 14, 5358–5361. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Molecules 2017, 22, 1606 13 of 17
23. Xie, Y.; Morikawa, T.; Ninomiya, K.; Imura, K.; Muraoka, O.; Yuan, D.; Yoshikawa, M. Medicinal flowers.
XXIII. New taraxastane-type triterpene, punicanolic acid, with tumor necrosis factor-a inhibitory activity
from the flowers of Punica granatum. Chem. Pharm. Bull. Tokyo 2008, 56, 1628–1631. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24. Yuan, T.; Wan, C.; Ma, H.; Seeram, N.P. New phenolics from the flowers of Punica granatum and their in vitro
α-glucosidase inhibitory activities. Planta Med. 2013, 79, 1674–1679. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25. Bagri, P.; Ali, M.; Sultana, S.; Aeri, V. New flavonoids from Punica granatum flowers. Chem. Nat. Compd. 2010,
46, 201–204. [CrossRef]
26. Chauhan, D.; Chauhan, J.S. Flavonoid diglycoside from Punica granatum. Pharm. Biol. 2001, 39, 155–157.
[CrossRef]
27. Srivastava, R.; Chauhan, D.; Chauhan, J. Flavonoid diglycosides from Punica granatum. Indian J. Chem. Sect. B
2001, 40B, 170–172.
28. Moneam, N.M.A.; El Sharaky, A.S.; Badreldin, M.M. Oestrogen content of pomegranate seeds. J. Chromatogr.
1988, 438, 438–442. [CrossRef]
29. Fischer, U.A.; Jaksch, A.V.; Carle, R.; Kammerer, D.R. Determination of lignans in edible and nonedible
parts of pomegranate (Punica granatum L.) and products derived therefrom, particularly focusing on the
quantitation of isolariciresinol using HPLC-DAD-ESI/MSn. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2012, 60, 283–292. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
30. Ito, H.; Li, P.; Koreishi, M.; Nagatomo, A.; Nishida, N.; Yoshida, T. Ellagitannin oligomers and a neolignan
from pomegranate arils and their inhibitory effects on the formation of advanced glycation end products.
Food Chem. 2014, 152, 323–330. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
31. El Wahab, S.; El Fiki, N.; Mostafa, F.; Hassan, A. Characterization of certain steroid hormones inPunica granatum L.
seeds. Bull. Fac. Pharm. 1998, 36, 11–15.
32. Heftmann, E.; Ko, S.-T.; Bennett, R.D. Identification of estrone in pomegranate seeds. Phytochemistry 1966, 5,
1337–1339. [CrossRef]
33. Choi, D.W.; Kim, J.Y.; Choi, S.H.; Jung, H.S.; Kim, H.J.; Cho, S.Y.; Kang, C.S.; Chang, S.Y. Identification of
steroid hormones in pomegranate (Punica granatum) using HPLC and GC-mass spectrometry. Food Chem.
2006, 96, 562–571. [CrossRef]
34. Neuhofer, H.; Witte, L.; Gorunovic, M.; Czygan, F. Alkaloids in the bark of Punica granatum L. (pomegranate)
from Yugoslavia. Pharmazie 1993, 48, 389–391.
35. Rafiq, Z.; Narasimhan, S.; Vennila, R.; Vaidyanathan, R. Punigratane, a novel pyrrolidine alkaloid from
Punica granatum rind with putative efflux inhibition activity. Nat. Prod. Res. 2016, 25, 1–6. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
36. Badria, F. Melatonin, serotonin, and tryptamine in some egyptian food and medicinal plants. J. Med. Food
2004, 5, 153–157. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
37. Fatope, M.O.; Al Burtomani, S.K.S.; Takeda, Y. Monoacylglycerol from Punica granatum seed oil. J. Agric.
Food Chem. 2002, 50, 357–360. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
38. Lal, C.; Sharma, M.; Shakyawar, D.; Raja, A.; Sharma, K.; Pareek, P. Natural Dye constituents from rind of
Punica granatum and its application on Pashmina fabrics. Arch. Appl. Sci. Res. 2011, 3, 350–357.
39. Yusuph, M.; Mann, J. A triglyceride from Punica granatum. Phytochemistry 1997, 44, 1391–1392. [CrossRef]
40. Tsuyuki, H.; Ito, S.; Nakatsukasa, Y. Studies on the lipids in pomegranate seeds. Bull. Coll. Agric. Vet. Med.
Nihon Univ. 1981, 38, 141–148.
41. Mena, P.; Calani, L.; Dall’Asta, C.; Galaverna, G.; García-Viguera, C.; Bruni, R.; Crozier, A.; Del Rio, D. Rapid
and comprehensive evaluation of (poly)phenolic compounds in pomegranate (Punica granatum L.) juice by
UHPLC-MSn. Molecules 2012, 17, 14821–14840. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
42. Poyrazog˘lu, E.; Gökmen, V.; Artιk, N. Organic acids and phenolic compounds in pomegranates (Punica
granatum L.) grown in Turkey. J. Food Compos. Anal. 2002, 15, 567–575. [CrossRef]
43. Artik, N.; Murakami, H.; Mori, T. Determination of phenolic compounds in pomegranate juice by using
HPLC. Fruit Process. 1998, 8, 492–499.
44. Wang, R.-F.; Xie, W.-D.; Zhang, Z.; Xing, D.-M.; Ding, Y.; Wang, W.; Ma, C.; Du, L.-J. Bioactive compounds
from the seeds of Punica granatum (pomegranate). J. Nat. Prod. 2004, 67, 2096–2098. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
45. Lansky, E.; Jiang, W.; Mo, H.; Bravo, L.; Froom, P.; Yu, W.; Harris, N.; Neeman, I.; Campbell, M. Possible
synergistic prostate cancer suppression by anatomically discrete pomegranate fractions. Investig. New Drugs
2005, 23, 11–20. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Molecules 2017, 22, 1606 14 of 17
46. Lansky, E.; Harrison, G.; Froom, P.; Jiang, W. Pomegranate (Punica granatum) pure chemical show possible
synergistic inhibition of human PC-3 prostate cancer cell invasion across Matrigel. Investig. New Drugs 2005,
23, 121–122. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
47. Seeram, N.P.; Adams, L.S.; Henning, S.M.; Niu, Y.; Zhang, Y.; Nair, M.G.; Heber, D. In vitro antiproliferative,
apoptotic and antioxidant activities of punicalagin, ellagic acid and a total pomegranate tannin extract are
enhanced in combination with other polyphenols as found in pomegranate juice. J. Nutr. Biochem. 2005, 16,
360–367. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
48. Bolling, B.W.; Chen, Y.-Y.; Chen, C.Y.O. Contributions of phenolics and added vitamin C to the antioxidant
capacity of pomegranate and grape juices: Synergism and antagonism among constituents. Int. J. Food
Sci. Technol. 2013, 48, 2650–2658. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
49. Bolling, B.W.; Chen, Y.-Y.; Kamil, A.G.; Chen, C.Y.O. Assay dilution factors confound measures of total
antioxidant capacity in polyphenol-rich juices. J. Food Sci. 2012, 77, H69–H75. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
50. Dey, D.; Debnath, S.; Hazra, S.; Ghosh, S.; Ray, R.; Hazra, B. Pomegranate pericarp extract
enhances the antibacterial activity of ciprofloxacin against extended-spectrum β-lactamase (ESBL) and
metallo-β-lactamase (MBL) producing Gram-negative bacilli. Food Chem. Toxicol. 2012, 50, 4302–4309.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
51. Reis, J.F.; Monteiro, V.V.S.; de Souza Gomes, R.; do Carmo, M.M.; da Costa, G.V.; Ribera, P.C.; Monteiro, M.C.
Action mechanism and cardiovascular effect of anthocyanins: A systematic review of animal and human
studies. J. Transl. Med. 2016, 14, 315. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
52. Lin, B.-W.; Gong, C.-C.; Song, H.-F.; Cui, Y.-Y. Effects of anthocyanins on the prevention and treatment of
cancer. Br. J. Pharmacol. 2017, 174, 1226–1243. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
53. Azzini, E.; Giacometti, J.; Russo, G.L. Antiobesity effects of anthocyanins in preclinical and clinical studies.
Oxid. Med. Cell. Longev. 2017, 2017, 2740364. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
54. Morais, C.A.; de Rosso, V.V.; Estadella, D.; Pisani, L.P. Anthocyanins as inflammatory modulators and the
role of the gut microbiota. J. Nutr. Biochem. 2016, 33, 1–7. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
55. Liobikas, J.; Skemiene, K.; Trumbeckaite, S.; Borutaite, V. Anthocyanins in cardioprotection: A path through
mitochondria. Phytother. Res. 2016, 113, 808–815. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
56. Li, D.; Wang, P.; Luo, Y.; Zhao, M.; Chen, F. Health benefits of anthocyanins and molecular mechanisms:
Update from recent decade. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 2017, 57, 1729–1741. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
57. Borges, F.; Fernandes, E.; Roleira, F. Progress towards the discovery of xanthine oxidase inhibitors.
Curr. Med. Chem. 2002, 9, 195–217. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
58. Pergola, C.; Rossi, A.; Dugo, P.; Cuzzocrea, S.; Sautebin, L. Inhibition of nitric oxide biosynthesis by anthocyanin
fraction of blackberry extract. Nitric Oxide 2006, 15, 30–39. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
59. Dreiseitel, A.; Korte, G.; Schreier, P.; Oehme, A.; Locher, S.; Hajak, G.; Sand, P.G. sPhospholipase A2 is
inhibited by anthocyanidins. J. Neural Transm. 2009, 116, 1071–1077. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
60. Speciale, A.; Canali, R.; Chirafisi, J.; Saija, A.; Virgili, F.; Cimino, F. Cyanidin-3-O-glucoside protection against
TNF-α-induced endothelial dysfunction: Involvement of nuclear factor-κB signaling. J. Agric. Food Chem.
2010, 58, 12048–12054. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
61. DeFuria, J.; Bennett, G.; Strissel, K.J.; Perfield, J.W.; Milbury, P.E.; Greenberg, A.S.; Obin, M.S. Dietary
blueberry attenuates whole-body insulin resistance in high fat-fed mice by reducing adipocyte death and its
inflammatory sequelae. J. Nutr. 2009, 139, 1510–1516. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
62. Mykkänen, O.T.; Huotari, A.; Herzig, K.-H.; Dunlop, T.W.; Mykkänen, H.; Kirjavainen, P.V. Wild blueberries
(Vaccinium myrtillus) alleviate inflammation and hypertension associated with developing obesity in mice
fed with a high-fat diet. PLoS ONE 2014, 9, e114790. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
63. Baum, J.; Howard, L.; Prior, R.; Lee, S. Effect of Aronia melanocarpa (black chokeberry) supplementation on
the development of obesity in mice fed a high-fat diet. J. Berry Res. 2016, 6, 203–212. [CrossRef]
64. Wright, O.R.L.; Netzel, G.A.; Sakzewski, A.R. A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of the
effect of dried purple carrot on body mass, lipids, blood pressure, body composition, and inflammatory
markers in overweight and obese adults: The QUENCH trial. Can. J. Physiol. Pharmacol. 2013, 91, 480–488.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
65. Fimognari, C.; Berti, F.; Nüsse, M.; Cantelli-Forti, G.; Hrelia, P. Induction of apoptosis in two human leukemia
cell lines as well as differentiation in human promyelocytic cells by cyanidin-3-O-β-glucopyranoside.
Biochem. Pharmacol. 2004, 67, 2047–2056. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Molecules 2017, 22, 1606 15 of 17
66. Malik, M.; Zhao, C.; Schoene, N.; Guisti, M.; Moyer, M.; Magnuson, B. Anthocyanin-rich extract from Aronia
meloncarpa E induces a cell cycle block in colon cancer but not normal colonic cells. Nutr. Cancer 2003, 46,
186–196. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
67. Lee, S.; Park, S.; Park, S.; Park, J.; Shin, D.; Kim, G.; Ryu, C.; Shin, S.; Jung, J.; Kang, H.; Lee, W.; Choi, Y.
Induction of apoptosis in human leukemia U937 cells by anthocyanins through down-regulation of Bcl-2
and activation of caspases. Int. J. Oncol. 2009, 34, 1077–1083. [PubMed]
68. De Nigris, F.; Balestrieri, M.L.; Williams-Ignarro, S.; D’Armiento, F.P.; Fiorito, C.; Ignarro, L.J.; Napoli, C.
The influence of pomegranate fruit extract in comparison to regular pomegranate juice and seed oil on nitric
oxide and arterial function in obese Zucker rats. Nitric Oxide 2007, 17, 50–54. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
69. Mohan, M.; Waghulde, H.; Kasture, S. Effect of pomegranate juice on Angiotensin II-induced hypertension
in diabetic wistar rats. Phytother. Res. 2010, 24, S196–S203. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
70. Asgary, S.; Sahebkar, A.; Afshani, M.R.; Keshvari, M.; Haghjooyjavanmard, S.; Rafieian-Kopaei, M.
Clinical evaluation of blood pressure lowering, endothelial function improving, hypolipidemic and
anti-inflammatory effects of pomegranate juice in hypertensive subjects. Phytother. Res. 2014, 28, 193–199.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
71. Ben-Simhon, Z.; Judeinstein, S.; Trainin, T.; Harel-Beja, R.; Bar-Ya’akov, I.; Borochov-Neori, H.; Holland, D.
A “white” anthocyanin-less pomegranate (Punica granatum L.) caused by an insertion in the coding region
of the leucoanthocyanidin dioxygenase (LDOX; ANS) gene. PLoS ONE 2015, 10, e0142777. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
72. Zhao, X.; Yuan, Z.; Feng, L.; Fang, Y. Cloning and expression of anthocyanin biosynthetic genes in red and
white pomegranate. J. Plant Res. 2015, 128, 687–696. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
73. Okuda, T.; Yoshida, T.; Hatano, T. Ellagitannins as active constituents of medicinal plants. Planta Med. 1989,
55, 117–122. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
74. Wilson, A.E.; Matel, H.D.; Tian, L. Glucose ester enabled acylation in plant specialized metabolism.
Phytochem. Rev. 2016, 15, 1057–1074. [CrossRef]
75. Seeram, N.P.; Henning, S.M.; Zhang, Y.; Suchard, M.; Li, Z.; Heber, D. Pomegranate juice ellagitannin
metabolites are present in human plasma and some persist in urine for up to 48 hours. J. Nutr. 2006, 136,
2481–2485. [PubMed]
76. Cerdá, B.; Espín, J.C.; Parra, S.; Martínez, P.; Tomás-Barberán, F.A. The potent in vitro antioxidant
ellagitannins from pomegranate juice are metabolised into bioavailable but poor antioxidant
hydroxy-6H-dibenzopyran-6-one derivatives by the colonic microflora of healthy humans. Eur. J. Nutr. 2004,
43, 205–220. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
77. Selma, M.V.; Espín, J.C.; Tomás-Barberán, F.A. Interaction between phenolics and gut microbiota: Role in
human health. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2009, 57, 6485–6501. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
78. Mertens-Talcott, S.U.; Jilma-Stohlawetz, P.; Rios, J.; Hingorani, L.; Derendorf, H. Absorption, metabolism,
and antioxidant effects of pomegranate (Punica granatum L.) polyphenols after ingestion of a standardized
extract in healthy human volunteers. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2006, 54, 8956–8961. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
79. Tomás-Barberán, F.A.; García-Villalba, R.; González-Sarrías, A.; Selma, M.V.; Espín, J.C. Ellagic acid
metabolism by human gut microbiota: Consistent observation of three urolithin phenotypes in intervention
trials, independent of food source, age, and health status. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2014, 62, 6535–6538. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
80. Lephart, E.D. Modulation of aromatase by phytoestrogens. Enzyme Res. 2015, 2015, 594656. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
81. Adams, L.S.; Zhang, Y.; Seeram, N.P.; Heber, D.; Chen, S. Pomegranate ellagitannin-derived compounds
exhibit antiproliferative and antiaromatase activity in breast cancer cells. Cancer Prev. Res. 2010, 3, 108–113.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
82. Zhang, W.; Chen, J.-H.; Aguilera-Barrantes, I.; Shiau, C.-W.; Sheng, X.; Wang, L.-S.; Stoner, G.D.;
Huang, Y.-W. Urolithin A suppresses the proliferation of endometrial cancer cells by mediating estrogen
receptor-α-dependent gene expression. Mol. Nutr. Food Res. 2016, 60, 2387–2395. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
83. Stolarczyk, M.; Piwowarski, J.P.; Granica, S.; Stefan´ska, J.; Naruszewicz, M.; Kiss, A.K. Extracts from
Epilobium sp. herbs, their components and gut microbiota metabolites of epilobium ellagitannins, urolithins,
inhibit hormone-dependent prostate cancer cells-(LNCaP) proliferation and PSA secretion. Phytother. Res.
2013, 27, 1842–1848. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Molecules 2017, 22, 1606 16 of 17
84. Sanchez-Gonzalez, C.; Ciudad, C.J.; Noe, V.; Izquierdo-Pulido, M. Walnut polyphenol metabolites, urolithins
A and B, inhibit the expression of the prostate-specific antigen and the androgen receptor in prostate cancer
cells. Food Funct. 2014, 5, 2922–2930. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
85. Sánchez-González, C.; Ciudad, C.J.; Izquierdo-Pulido, M.; Noé, V. Urolithin A causes p21 up-regulation in
prostate cancer cells. Eur. J. Nutr. 2016, 55, 1099–1112. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
86. Go, R.-E.; Hwang, K.-A.; Choi, K.-C. Cytochrome P450 1 family and cancers. J. Steroid Biochem. Mol. Biol.
2015, 147, 24–30. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
87. Kasimsetty, S.G.; Bialonska, D.; Reddy, M.K.; Thornton, C.; Willett, K.L.; Ferreira, D. Effects of pomegranate
chemical constituents/intestinal microbial metabolites on CYP1B1 in 22Rv1 prostate cancer cells. J. Agric.
Food Chem. 2009, 57, 10636–10644. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
88. Vicinanza, R.; Zhang, Y.; Henning, S.M.; Heber, D. Pomegranate juice metabolites, ellagic acid and urolithin
A, synergistically inhibit androgen-independent prostate cancer cell growth via distinct effects on cell cycle
control and apoptosis. Evid. Based Complement. Altern. Med. 2013, 2013, 247504. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
89. Zhou, B.; Wang, J.; Zheng, G.; Qiu, Z. Methylated urolithin A, the modified ellagitannin-derived metabolite,
suppresses cell viability of DU145 human prostate cancer cells via targeting miR-21. Food Chem. Toxicol. 2016,
97, 375–384. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
90. Giorgio, C.; Mena, P.; DelRio, D.; Brighenti, F.; Barocelli, E.; Hassan-Mohamed, I.; Callegari, D.; Lodola, A.;
Tognolini, M. The ellagitannin colonic metabolite urolithin D selectively inhibits EphA2 phosphorylation in
prostate cancer cells. Mol. Nutr. Food Res. 2015, 59, 2155–2167. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
91. Krausova, M.; Korinek, V. Wnt signaling in adult intestinal stem cells and cancer. Cell. Signal 2014, 26,
570–579. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
92. Sharma, M.; Li, L.; Celver, J.; Killian, C.; Kovoor, A.; Seeram, N.P. Effects of fruit ellagitannin extracts, ellagic
acid, and their colonic metabolite, urolithin A, on Wnt signaling. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2010, 58, 3965–3969.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
93. Kasimsetty, S.G.; Bialonska, D.; Reddy, M.K.; Ma, G.; Khan, S.I.; Ferreira, D. Colon cancer chemopreventive
activities of pomegranate ellagitannins and urolithins. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2010, 58, 2180–2187. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
94. Cho, H.; Jung, H.; Lee, H.; Yi, H.C.; Kwak, H.-K.; Hwang, K.T. Chemopreventive activity of ellagitannins
and their derivatives from black raspberry seeds on HT-29 colon cancer cells. Food Funct. 2015, 6, 1675–1683.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
95. Nasimudeen, R.J.; Shams, T. Cardiovascular disease management through restrained inflammatory responses.
Curr. Pharm. Des. 2016, 22, 940–946.
96. Piwowarski, J.P.; Granica, S.; Kiss, A.K. Influence of gut microbiota-derived ellagitannins’ metabolites
urolithins on pro-inflammatory activities of human neutrophils. Planta Med. 2014, 80, 887–895. [PubMed]
97. Mele, L.; Mena, P.; Piemontese, A.; Marino, V.; López-Gutiérrez, N.; Bernini, F.; Brighenti, F.; Zanotti, I.;
Del Rio, D. Antiatherogenic effects of ellagic acid and urolithins in vitro. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 2016, 599,
42–50. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
98. Giménez-Bastida, J.A.; González-Sarrías, A.; Larrosa, M.; Tomás-Barberán, F.; Espín, J.C.; García-Conesa, M.-T.
Ellagitannin metabolites, urolithin A glucuronide and its aglycone urolithin A, ameliorate TNF-α-induced
inflammation and associated molecular markers in human aortic endothelial cells. Mol. Nutr. Food Res. 2012,
56, 784–796. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
99. Naseem, K.M. The role of nitric oxide in cardiovascular diseases. Mol. Asp. Med. 2005, 26, 33–65. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
100. Spigoni, V.; Mena, P.; Cito, M.; Fantuzzi, F.; Bonadonna, R.; Brighenti, F.; Dei Cas, A.; Del Rio, D. Effects on
nitric oxide production of urolithins, gut-derived ellagitannin metabolites, in human aortic endothelial cells.
Molecules 2016, 21, 1009. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
101. Romo-Vaquero, M.; García-Villalba, R.; González-Sarrías, A.; Beltrán, D.; Tomás-Barberán, F.A.; Espín, J.C.;
Selma, M.V. Interindividual variability in the human metabolism of ellagic acid: Contribution of
Gordonibacter to urolithin production. J. Funct. Food 2015, 17, 785–791. [CrossRef]
102. Selma, M.V.; Romo-Vaquero, M.; Garcia-Villalba, R.; Gonzalez-Sarrias, A.; Tomas-Barberan, F.A.; Espin, J.C.
The human gut microbial ecology associated with overweight and obesity determines ellagic acid metabolism.
Food Funct. 2016, 7, 1769–1774. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Molecules 2017, 22, 1606 17 of 17
103. González-Sarrías, A.; García-Villalba, R.; Romo-Vaquero, M.; Alasalvar, C.; Örem, A.; Zafrilla, P.;
Tomás-Barberán, F.A.; Selma, M.V.; Espín, J.C. Clustering according to urolithin metabotype explains
the interindividual variability in the improvement of cardiovascular risk biomarkers in overweight-obese
individuals consuming pomegranate: A randomised clinical trial. Mol. Nutr. Food Res. 2017, 61, 1600830.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
104. Yuan, T.; Ma, H.; Liu, W.; Niesen, D.B.; Shah, N.; Crews, R.; Rose, K.N.; Vattem, D.A.; Seeram, N.P.
Pomegranate’s neuroprotective effects against Alzheimer’s disease are mediated by urolithins, its
ellagitannin-gut microbial derived metabolites. ACS Chem. Neurosci. 2016, 7, 26–33. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
105. Liu, W.; Ma, H.; Frost, L.; Yuan, T.; Dain, J.A.; Seeram, N.P. Pomegranate phenolics inhibit formation of
advanced glycation endproducts by scavenging reactive carbonyl species. Food Funct. 2014, 5, 2996–3004.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
106. Ryu, D.; Mouchiroud, L.; Andreux, P.A.; Katsyuba, E.; Moullan, N.; Nicolet-dit-Felix, A.A.; Williams, E.G.;
Jha, P.; Lo Sasso, G.; Huzard, D.; et al. Urolithin A induces mitophagy and prolongs lifespan in C. elegans
and increases muscle function in rodents. Nat. Med. 2016, 22, 879–888. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
© 2017 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
