Vol. 5I REACTIONS OF HAEMATINS WITH PEROXIDES 451
ethyl hydroperoxide to give 'green compounds'
with two-banded absorption spectra. The exact
positions of these bands depend on the pH and the
amount of peroxide added. In the case of proto-
parahaematin additional transient absorption bands
are observed under certain conditions.
7. The 'green compound' given by pyridine uro-
parahaematin and ethyl hydroperoxide reduces
spontaneously and reversibly to a compound which
differs from pyridine urohaemochromogen in that
the positions of its absorption bands are nearer the
red and in that it does not combine with carbon
monoxide. The green compounds given by pyridine
protoparahaematin withhydrogen peroxide (pH 6 5)
and ethyl hydroperoxide are probably of the same
nature.
8. It is suggested that these 'green compounds'
correspond to those given by pyridine protopara-
haematin and hydrogen peroxide described by
Haurowitz, but that they are oxidation products of
the haematins and not compounds of the haematins
with hydrogen peroxide.
9. Urohaematin-peroxide is so far the only
example of a free haematin-peroxide compound
where the porphyrin ring is unaltered.
I wish to thank Dr E. F. Hartree for a sample of ethyl
hydroperoxide and Dr E. C. Slater for helpful discussions.
REFERENCES
Baeyer, A. & Villiger, V. (1901). Ber. dtech. chem. Gee. 34,
738.
Davies, T. H. (1940). J. biol. Chem. 135, 597.
Fischer, H. & Orth, H. (1934). Die Chemie dee Pyrrols, 2.
Leipzig: Akademische Verlagsgesellschaft.
Haurowitz, F. (1937a). Enzymologia, 2, 9.
Haurowitz, F. (1937b). Enzymologia, 4, 139.
Keilin, J. (1949). Biochem. J. 45, 448.
Keilin, J. (1950). Nature, Lond., 165, 151.
Keilin, D. & Hartree, E. F. (1945). Biochem. J. 39, 148.
Keilin, D. & Hartree, E. F. (1951). Biochem. J. 49, 88.
Kuhn, R. & Wassermann, A. (1933). IAebig8 Ann. 503,
203.
Lemberg, R. & Legge, J. W. (1949). Haematin compound8
and Bile Pigments. New York: Interscience.
Schalfejew, M. (1885). J. Soc. phys.-chim. ruMMe, p. 30; from
Ber. dtsch. chem. Ges. 18 (Referat Bd.), 232.
Shack, J. & Clark, W. Mansfield (1947). J. biol. Chem. 171,
143.
Theorell, H. (1947). Advanc. Enzymol. 7, 265.
A New Amino-acid Amide in the Groundnut Plant (Arachis hypogaea):
Evidence of the Occurrence of y-Methyleneglutamine
and y-Methyleneglutamic Acid
BY J. DONE AND L. FOVVDEN*
Human Nutrition Re8earch Unit, Medical Research Council Laboratorie8,
London, N.W. 3
(Received 20 October 1951)
A brief account of preliminary studies of a new
metabolite detected in groundnut plants has
already been given (Done & Fowden, 1951). The
substance was isolated and found to be an un-
saturated amino-acid amide. This earlier work is
now described in more detail, together with sub-
sequent investigations of the structure of the new
compound.
The first material examined was the 'sap' pro-
duced when the turgid stems of young seedlings
were incised between the cotyledons and the first
leaf. About 20/A. of liquid exuded from the cut
surfaces. It was found by paper chromatography
that the main ninhydrin-reacting component of the
exudate gave an orange-brown spot (R. = 0-66 on
chromatograms run in phenol-ammonia). The
colour of the ninhydrin spot varied somewhat on
different occasions, but always it was clearly outside
the range of colours obtained with known a-amino-
acids.
A large number of exudates produced in the
manner described have been examined, and the new
substance (I) has invariably been the dominant
ninhydrin-reacting component. When amounts of
the order of 20,ul. were chromatographed, much
smaller spots due to asparagine, glutamine, as-
partic acid, glutamic acid, alanine and other
amino-acids sometimes appeared.
(I) has also been detected in homogenates of
stems, leaves, hypocotyls and roots, but in these
many other ninhydrin-reacting compounds were
also present. The new compoumd could not be
* Present address: Department of Botany, University
College, London, W.C. 1.
29-2
J. DONE AND L. FOWDEN
detected in seedlings less than 2 days after germnina-
tion, but it occurred in all samples taken after the
differentiation of the first leaf, e.g. in the exudate
formed after the incision of the petiole of the fif-
teenth leaf of a -main stem, and in the gynophores
bearing immature fruits. The stem, root and hypo-
cotyl of seedlings germinated and maintained in the
dark for 12 days all contained (I). It was not
detected in immature or ripe seeds, or in the hydro-
lysate of a commercial sample of arachin. Thus, the
compound (I) appeared after germination of the
seed and occurred in all the vegetative tissues
examined.
A number of varieties of beans, peas and lupins,
and the sprouts of potato tubers were examined,
but no compound giving the type of ninhydrin re-
action shown by (I) was observed on the chromato-
grams. Preliminary examination of the
chemical propertiesof (I)
The action of hydrochloric acid. Exudate was
heated with 5K-hydrochloric acid at 1050 for 16 hr.
in a sealed tube; hydrochloric acid was removed by
evaporation. (I) could not be detected on chro-
matograms, but an intense yellow-brown spot
(R,=0-30 in phenol-ammonia) appeared. Here
again, the colour of the spot was quite distinct from
those obtained with known a-amino-acids. Similar
results were obtained after treatments with 5N-
hydrochloric acid for 3 days at 1050 and with
N-hydrochloric acid for 3 hr. at 1000. Spots due to
asparagine and glutamine occurred on chromato-
grams of the exudate, but the intensity of each of
these was less than one-tenth of the intensity of the
main spot due to (I). These amides were hydrolysed
to the corresponding acids by the hydrochloric acid
treatments.
When a sample of exudate containing 6-74,ug.
N/lp. was treated with N-hydrochloric acid for 3 hr.
at 1000, ammonia nitrogen equivalent to 2-7 ,ug./,l.
was produced. The conditions of hydrolysis in this
experiment were those used in the estimation of
amide nitrogen (Borsook & Dubnoff, 1939), s0 the
results could be explained by the hypothesis that
amide I -+ acid II + NH3 . This was supported by the
chromatographic evidence. The ratio of the R1 of
(I) to that of (II) in phenol-ammonia was 2-2. The
corresponding ratios for asparagine and glutam,ine
are 2-5 and 2-0 respectively (Dent, 1948).
(I) and (II) both combined with copper as shown
by the copper acetylacetonate test (Wieland &
Fischer, 1948); thus the presence of a-amino
nitrogen was indicated.
Autolysis. When homogenized leaf tissue was
allowed to autolyse for 3 hr. at 370 chromatograms
showed that (I) had been converted to (II). Both
compounds occurred in ethanolic extracts of fresh
plant 'tops'.
I8olation of compound (I). (I) was retained when
diluted exudates were run through a column of Zeo-
Ka.rb 215 (Partridge & Westall, 1949) and the com-
pound was isolated after elution with ammonia
solution. It was readily soluble in cold watef and
formed colourle#s plates on crystallization from
aqueous ethanol. Elementary analysis gave an
empirical formula C6HL003N2- Halfthe nitrogenwas
released as ammonia by treatment with N-sodium
hydroxide for 24 hr. at room temperature, and by
treatment with N-hydrochloric acid for 3hr. at 1000.
Isolation of compound (II). De-Acidite B
(Partridge & Brimley, 1949) retained compound
(II) when an autolysate of the plant 'tops' was run
through a column of the material. The new acid was
eluted by acetic acid followed by dilute hydro-
chloric acid, and it was isolated by recrystallization
of the solid left after evaporation of fractions of the
effluent from the column. The compound was only
slightly soluble in cold water but much more
soluble in hot water. It was therefore convenient to
crystallize the compound from hot water. Ele-
mentary analysis gave an empirical formula
C H904N. All the nitrogen was amino nitrogen as
measured by the Van Slyke nitrous acid method.
The equivalent weight found by titration with
sodium hydroxide was 158 (formula weight 159).
No optical activity was detected in an aqueous
solution of the sodium salt.
The structure of the new compounds
The analyses of the new compounds confirmed
the chromatographic evidence that (II) was an
a-amino-acid derived from (I) by deamidation.
The presence of a double bond. Both compounds
decolorized a solution of potassium permanganate
at room temperature. Treatment with ozone gave
a substance which could not be distinguished from
aspartic acid by paper chromatography. The new
amide therefore appears to resemble asparagine and
glutamine in that the amide group is not attached to
the a-carbon atom.
The product of the action of ozone on (II) was
isolated and shown to be aspartic acid by exhaustive
methylation to fumaric acid (Braunstein, Nem-
schinskaya & Vilenkina, 1947).
When (II) was hydrogenated in the presence of
palladium-on-carbon catalyst, the amount of gas
absorbed corresponded to that required for a re-
action C6H904N -+ CAHLL04N.
The reduced form of (II), compound (III). Ele-
mentary analysis of (III) gave the empirical
formula C6HI104N. The compound formed a purple
spot with ninhydrin at B. 0-42 on chromatograms
run in phenol-ammonia. The aqueous solution
showed no optical rotation.
Since aspartic acid was produced by the action of
ozone on (II), it seemed likely that the compound
452 I952
NEW AMINO-ACIDS IN THE GROUNDNUT PLANT
contained COOH. CH(NH2)CH2C=, and since a
titratable carboxyl group has also been detected,
possible formulae were
COOH. CH(NH2) . CH2. CH=CH.COOH
and
COOH. CH(NH2) . CH2. C(=CH2) . COOH.
The corresponding saturated compounds are a-
aminoadipic and y-methylglutamic acids respec-
tively.
Substance (III) differed from DL-a-aminoadipic
acid in its solubility and melting point and in its
position on paper chromatograms. a-Aminoadipic
acid is converted to ornithine by hydrazoic acid
(Adamson, 1939). However, treatment of (III) with
hydrazoic acid gave a substance which could be
separated from ornithine on chromatograms run in
aqueous n-butanol-acetic acid mixture (Partridge,
1948). It was therefore evident that (III) was not
DL-a-aminoadipic acid.
Fig. 1. X-ray powder photographs of (a) compound (III)
and (b) synthetic y-methylglutamic acid. Cu (Ni filtered)
KK radiation; specimen to film distance 5 cm.
On the other hand, it had been found that the
melting point of (III) was low compared with those
of most of the known ca-amino-acids, and pyrrole
derivatives had been detected in the vapour formed
when (III) was fused with zinc dust. These facts
suggested that the compound contained an o-amino
and a y-carboxyl group, and it was considered that
(III) might be y-methylglutamic acid.
Synthesi8 of y-methylglutamic acid. Glutamic acid
has been synthesized by Michael condensations:
methyl acrylate and ethyl phthalimidomalonate
were employed by Marvel & Stoddard (1938), and
methyl acrylate and ethyl acetaminomalonate by
Snyder, Shekelton & Lewis (1945).
Evidence ofthe synthesis of (III) by condensation
of methyl methacrylate with ethyl phthalimido-
malonate was obtained. However, better results
were obtained by the reaction between methyl
methacrylate and ethyl acetaminomalonate:
C02C2H5
CH3.CO.NH .CH
C02C2H5
CH3
+ CH2=C . C02.CH3
NaOC2H5
C02C2H5 CH3
I
CH,.CO .NH.C-CH2.--CH- L;02CH3
C02C2H5
I
Hydrolysis and
decarboxylation
COOH CH3
NH2-CH-CH2-CH-COOH
Elementary analysis of the synthetic material
gave the empirical formula CH1104N; when fused
with zinc dust it gave a positive pine-splinter test for
pyrrole derivatives.
The position of the synthetic compound on paper
chromatograms coincided with that of the natural
acid (III). Both substances melted at 154-155o and
the melting point of a mixture was unchanged.
Prof. Kathleen Lonsdale, F.R.S., very kindly
arranged for X-ray powder photographs of the
natural and synthetic acids to be prepared (Fig. 1).
She reported that the two samples gave identical
results.
Oxidative degradation of (II). The synthesis of
(III) had provided good evidence of the carbon
skeleton of the new compounds. The possible posi-
tion of the double bond had been indicated by the
formation of aspartic acid by treatment of the un-
saturated compounds with ozone. However, the
yield of aspartic acid was low, and no non-nitro-
genous fragment had been isolated. Accordingly,
further experiments were made on the oxidative
degradation of (II).
The compound reacted almost completely with
an approximately equimolecular amount of potas-
sium permanganate in ice-cold aqueous solution.
Further oxidation with periodic acid gave, on
different occasions, yields of formaldehyde (dime-
done derivative) of 41, 27 and 25% (mol. basis).
The main ninhydrin-reacting component resulting
from permanganate-periodate oxidation could not
be separated from aspartic acid on chromatograms
run in phenol-ammonia, butanol-acetic acid
VoI. 5I 453
454 J. DONE AN]
(Partridge, 1948) or collidine-lutidine solvents.
Evidence that aspartic acid was formed in 32%
yield waa obtained by a quantitative chromato-
graphic method (Fowden, 1951).
Exhaustive methylation (Braunstein et al. 1947)
of the product of oxidative degradation after
removal of formaldehyde gave fumaric acid,
corresponding to a yield of 29% of aspartic acid.
Provisional structures of the new compounds are
included in the following scheme, which also sum-
marizes the main reactions described:
COOH
CR2
I + H.CHOCHt.NI{2
&OH Cold KMnO4 solution
03 ,, O followed by H104
ONH2 COOH
I
C=CH2 :=CH2
CH2 Mild hydrolysis, H2
CH.NH2 Autolysis CH.NH2I I
COOH COOH
y-Methylenle- y-Methylene-
glutamine glutamic acid
(I) (II)
Synthesis from methyl
methacrylate and ethyl
acetamidomalonate
D)
KH2
Pd-on-C
catalyst
COOH
I
CH .CH3
ItH2
CH.NH2
I
COOH
y-Methylglutamic
acid
(III)
EXPERIMENTAL
All melting points are uncorrected.
18okation of compound (I). Young plants (3000-4000) were
grown in boxes containing either garden soil or gravel and
nutrient salts. Exudates were obtained by cutting the main
stems when four to eight leaves had developed. They were
collected in capillary tubes, and stored in the refrigerator in
2-4 ml. batches. The precipitate which formed was removed
by centrifugation. A total of approx. 40 ml. of material was
obtained. Preliminary attempts to concentrate or crystal-
lize (I) by extraction of dried exudate with ethanol and by
other methods were not successful.
L. iFOWDElfN I952
A column of Zeo-Karb 215 was prepared (Partridge &
Westall, 1949), 15 cm. in length and 0-9 cm. in diameter.
The exudate material was diluted with 250 ml. of water and
passed through the column at the rate of 1 drop in
approx. 4 sec. The resin darkened progressively from the
top as the mixture passed through the column, until finally
only a few mm. at the bottom remained unchanged.
Distilled water (11.) was used to wash the column and then
a solution of 0-15x-NH, was run through. Eighteen
fractions of vol. 10-15 ml. were collected.
A light-coloured band moved down the column during
elution. This was apparently due to (I), since when it 'broke
through' fraction 9, 5p1. of the effluent gave a strong
yellow to red colour when treated with ninhydrin on filter
paper. Chromatograms of 5014. amounts of the eluates
were run in phenol-NH,. The results are given in Table 1.
Table 1. Elution of compound (I)from Zeo-Karb 215
with dilute ammonia 8oluti%n
(For details, see text.)
Fractions Appearance of filter-paper chromatogram
(serial nos.) (Phenol-NH3-water)
1-8 Faint (I) spot
9 Fairly strong (I) spot
10-12 (I) spot about 10 times as strong as that in
fraction 9. Faint pink spot at origin
13-17 (I) spot as in preceding fractions. Faint
purple streaks before and after (I)
18 (I) spot about half as strong as that of
fraction 9
Fractions 1-7 were discarded. Fractions 8-17 were
evaporated to dryness over H1SO4 in a vacuum desiccator.
190 mg. of residue were obtained which yielded 120 mg. of
material in flat colourless crystals after two crystallizations
from aqueous ethanol. (Found: C, 46-0; H. 6-5; N (Dumas),
17-3. CgH10O0N, requires C, 45-6; H, 6-3; N, 17.7%.) When
heated in a sealed melting-point tube at the rate of about
3°/min., signs of decomposition appeared at 1730 and in-
creased until 1820 had been reached. No melting or further
change occurred up to 2600. The tube was cut open at both
ends, and the vapour inside blown over the surface of a moist
litmus paper which then gave a strong alkaline reaction.
(I) dissolved very readily in water, and the solution gave
a slightly acidic reaction with bromothymol blue.
Estimation of amide nitrogen. The microdiffusion method
of Dekker, Stone & Fruton (1949) was used, adapted to a
small diffusion unit made of paraffin wax.
A solution (50!p.) made by dissolving 2-223 mg. of (I) in
1 ml. of water was placed in one depression in the wax.
2x-NaOH (50p4.) was placed in a second depression, and
3iq-H,SO4 (100pd.) in a third. The unit was covered by a
glass plate and sealed by melting a little wax at the edges of
the glass. The alkali was then shaken into the test solution,
and theunit left at room temperaturefor30 hr. The acidwas
removed to a test tube, and the alkaline residue digested
with nitrogen-free H2S04 and a selenium catalyst. Nitrogen
in the mixtures and in a digest of the original solution was
estimated colorimetrically after nesslerization. (Found:
diffused N, 9-3; residual N, 9-1; total N, 18.2 %.)
Following Borsook & Dubnoff (1939), who determined
amide N by hydrolysis in N-acid, 1 ml. of solution as used in
_s-, - . _-. .4
NEW AMINO-ACIDS IN THE GROUNDNUT PLANT
the preceding experiment was heated for 3 hr. with 05 ml.
3N-H,SO4 at 100°. NH,-N in the hydrolysate, as deter-
mined by nesslerization, was equivalent to 8.7% of (I).
Treatment with ozone. 5 mg. of (I) dissolved in water were
treated with ozone. When the solution was concentrated in a
vacuum desiccator, extensive decomposition occurred with
the formation of carbonaceous matter. The main ninhydrin.
reacting component gave a purple spot which coincided in
position on paper chromatograms with that due to aspartic
acid. It could not be separated from added aspartic acid on
two-dimensional or long-developed one-dimensional chro-
matograms in aqueous phenol-NH3 and n-butanol-acetic
acid (Partridge, 1948).
The isolation of compound (11). The tops of the young
plants from which the exudates had been obtained were
broken up in water in a blender and then incubated over-
night at 370 in the presence of a little thymol. The auto-
lysates were filtered through muslin and stored in the
refrigerator. The autolysates were pooled, charcoal was
added and the mixture stirred for 30 min. at room temper-
ature and filtered. The final volume was about 101.
The liquid was passed through a column ofZeo-Karb 215,
which adsorbed all the ninhydrin-reacting substances. The
column was washed with several litres of distilled water, and
then a solution of015x-NH3 was run through. The effluent
was evaporated under reduced pressure until the volume was
1-8 1., and then extracted several times with ether to remove
fat. Dissolved ether was removed by aeration, and theliquid
again treatedwith charcoalatroomtemperatureand filtered.
A column of De-Acidite B was prepared (Partridge &
Brimley, 1949) measuring 40 x 2-4 cm. The liquid was run
through at the rate of5-6 ml./min., and the effluentcollected
in fractions of approx. 250 ml.
Chromatograms showed that the column hadremoved the
acidic components (aspartic and glutamic acids and com-
pound II) from the first 1.1 1. of liquid. The later fractions
(about 650 ml.) contained the acidic as well as other amino-
acids.
The column was washed with 1-8 1. of 0 l1-acetic acid
followed by 500 ml. of 0 25N-HCI, at the rate of about
100 ml./hr. Fractions were collected at 50-0 min. intervals
Chromatograms of fractions 1-6 showed glutamic acid
and only traces of (II), so they were discarded. Pooled
fractions were evaporated by distillation at reduced
pressure, and residual water was removed by drying over
NaOH in a vacuum desiccator.
Fractional crystallization of the products from water
yielded 1-063 g. of crystals which gave only spot (II) on
chromatograms, and a number of samples of total weight
2 680 g.whichwerefoundto containslighttracesof glutamic
acid. The former batch was used for analytical and other
quantitative work. The other samples were used for
qualitative examinations, and, after further crystallizations,
for the preparation of derivatives.
Some properties of compound (II). When heated in a
melting-point tube, decomposition commenced at 1960,
after which the substance changed in colour through yellow
to dark brown at 3250. With more rapid heating (i.e. greater
than 2°/min.) the first change occurred at 2040, when the
surface of the substance became 'moist'.
The acid had a low solubility in water. No optical activity
was detected when 96 3 mg. were made neutral to phenol-
phthalein with NaOH in water (final vol. 1-82 ml.) and
observed in a 1 dm. polarimeter tube. (Found: C, 44-1;
H, 5-7; N, 8-6; amino N (Van Slyke nitrous acid method,
4 min. reaction), 8.4. Ca,H904N requires C, 45-2; H, 5B7;
N, 8.8%.) When 164 mg. of (II) was titrated with 0-735w-
NaOH to a faint pink to phenolphthalein, the equiv. wt.
was found to be 158 (formula wt. 159). C0, was evolved
when (II) was dissolved in 10% (w/v) NasCO, solution.
Treatment with ozone. 100 mg. of (II) was suspended in
7 ml. of water and ozonized oxygen was passed through for
45 min. The product of the treatment was at first a clear
solution, but extensive decomposition occurred when it was
allowed to stand overnight. The main ninhydrin-reacting
component found on chromatograms coincided in position
with aspartic acid.
After removal of the charred material by ifitration the
solution was boiled with CuCO3. The excess CuCO3 was
removed by filtration, and, on cooling, a copper compound
of low solubility in water crystallized out. Copper was re-
moved from this by H,S, and 11 1 mg. of a white crystalline
solid were obtained by crystallization from aqueousethanol.
This was shown to be aspartic acid by exhaustive methyla-
tion to fumaric acid (Braunstein et al. 1947). The product of
exhaustive methylation, isolated from the reaction mixture
with ether by means of a small continuous extraction
apparatus, melted at 2950 in a sealed tube. The melting
point was unchanged when the product was mixed with an
authentic sample of fumaric acid.
Oxidation with permanganae. KiMnO solution (1%, w/v)
was added to about 1 ml. of a saturated solution of (II),
until there was a slight permanent pink colour. This colour
was discharged by adding 1 drop more of the solution of
(II). The mixture was filtered and electrolytically desalted
(Consden, Gordon & Martin, 1947).
Chromatograms run with aqueous n-butanol-acetic acid
mixture showed a prominent spot which coincided in posi-
tion with aspartic acid. Two other spots were visible: a well
marked spot oflower R,, and a faint spot of higher R, than
the aspartic acid.
In another experiment 96 mg. of (II) were dissolved in
4 ml. 10% (w/v) Na2CO, solution. Finely powdered
KMnO, was added until a slight excess could be detected.
A few mg. more of (II) were then added. The mixture was
warmed to about 600 for a few minutes, when coagulation of
MnO, commenced. It was then filtered, and the precipitate
washed. A portion of the filtrate was desalted and chro-
matograms showed a single spot coincident in position with
aspartic acid. However, the latter could not be isolated as
the Cu salt, presumably because ofthe high concentration of
electrolytes in the mixture. Later, oxalic acid was isolated
from residues from this experiment through the Ca salt
(melting point of the di-p-toluidide 2640, unchanged when
mixed with an authentic sample).
Oxidation with cold aqueous permanganate was studied
in more detail later.
Reduction of compound (11) to compund (111) and in-
vestigation of the product. In one experiment, 28-9 ml. of H,
were absorbed by 180 mg. of (II) suspended in 10 ml. water
with 50 mg. palladium-on-carbon catalyst. (The theoretical
amount for a reaction C,H,04N-+C,HL0O4N under the same
experimental conditions was 27-8 ml.)
After removal of the catalyst, the solution was evapor-
ated in a vacuum desiccator. Solid separated when 1-2 ml.
of solution remained. This was dissolved by addition of the
minimum pfwater. Acetone was added and the mixture left
overnight in the refrigerator. 154 mg. of product were ob-
tained after filtration. (Found: C, 44*7; H, 6-8; N, 9-1.
C*H11O4N requires C, 44-7; H, 6-8; N, 8-7 %.) Equiv. wt. by
Vol. 5I 4cK55
J. DONE AND L. FOWDEN
titration with 0-103N-NaOH was 159 (equiv. wt. of mono-
basic C6HnO4N, 161). Melting points varied from 154-165°,
apparentlydependingon the rate ofheating and the amount
of material used.
2-3 mg. of (III) were shaken with conc. H2804 and
excess ofNHin CHCl, at 43-46° (Adamson, 1939). A sample
of the reaction product was desalted and on paper chro-
matography the main ninhydrin-reacting component of the
solution had a higher Rp value than ornithine in aqueous n-
butanol-acetic acid mixture, being clearly separated from
added ornithine.
Synthe8is of y-methylglutamic acid. Preliminary experi-
ments were based on the glutamic acid synthesis ofMarvel &
Stoddard (1938), methyl methacrylate (containing quinol to
inhibit polymerization) being used in place of the methyl
acrylate. Methyl methacrylate and diethyl phthalimido-
malonate were refluxed in absolute ethanol in which small
amounts of sodium had been dissolved. Volatile com-
ponents were removed after different periods of refluxing,
and samples of the residues were hydrolysed overnight with
20% (w/v) HCI in sealed tubes at 1050. Chromatograms run
in aqueous n-butanol-acetic acid showed the presence of
glycine (presumablyfrom free diethylphthalimidomalonate)
and another component coincident in position with com-
pound (III) and presumably y-methylglutamic acid. The
glycine and phthalic acid also present could not be separated
from this bycrystallization from aqueous ethanol oraqueous
acetone. A copper salt of low solubility in water was ob-
tained from the hydrolysis product, which, after removal of
the copper by H2S, was found to yield only a trace of glycine
on the chromatograms run in butanol-acetic acid solvent,
together with an intense spot coincident in position with
(III). 1-83 g. of the copper salt were obtained from 23-8 g.
of diethyl phthalimidomalonate. However, preliminary
experiments indicated that better results could be obtained
by a different procedure.
Snyder et at. (1945) synthesized DL-glutamic acid from
methyl acrylate and diethyl acetaminomalonate. In the
experiment to be described, the conditions were similar to
those in the above-mentioned synthesis except that sulphur
was added to inhibit polymerization ofmethyl methacrylate
and that an intermediate was isolated and recrystallized
before hydrolysis.
Sodium (120 mg., 0-0052 g.atom) was dissolved in
approx. 20 ml. ethanol in a 200 ml. flask. 100 mg. sulphur
and 10-85 g. (0-05 mole) ethyl acetaminomalonate were
added. An attachment bearing a mechanical stirrer, a
reflux condenser, and a dropping funnel was fixed to the
flask. The contents were refluxed and 10 g. (0-1 mole) of
methyl methacrylate were added in drops during 4 hr.
Refluxing was continued for a further hour.
The reaction mixture yielded 7-34 g. of colourless crystals
after three crystallizations from ethanol. Melting point
109.50, unchanged on recrystallization. (Found: N
(Kjeldahl), 5-7, 5-8%.) This substance was not, ap-
parently, the primary condensation product of methyl
methacrylate and ethyl acetaminomalonate, the N content
of which would be 4-6%. A small sample was hydrolysed
overnight by 20% (w/v) HCI in a sealed tube at 1050, and
chromatograms run with n-butanol-acetic acid showed a
spot coincident in position with (III), and no glycine.
2-78 g. of the intermediate was hydrolysed by refluxing
in 20% (w/v) HCI, more HCI being added from time
to time to replace the acid which had been used in the
reaction.
The hydrolysate was evaporated almost to dryness at
reduced pressure. The process was repeated three times
after addition of 5 ml. amounts of water. The product was
then dissolved in 50 ml. of water. Residual HCI was re-
moved by two extractions of the solution with excess of a
5% (w/v) solution of trioctylamine in CHCl3 (Lester Smith
& Page, 1948). The aqueous layer was washed twice with
CHCl3 and evaporated in a vacuum desiccator until
solid appeared. A further batch of the intermediate (3-62 g.)
was hydrolysed and the acid-free product combined with
that from the first batch. The crude product was dissolved in
the minimum ofwater. Acetone was added, and the mixture
cooled in crushed ice and left overnight in the refrigerator.
The resulting solid was filtered off, dissolved in the minimum
amount ofwater, and again treated with acetone, cooled and
left overnight in the refrigerator. 2-82 g. crystalline solid
were obtained (45% yield, based on the diethyl acetamino-
malonate). (Found: C, 44-9; H, 6-8; N, 8-5. C6H,104N
requires C, 44-7; H, 6-8; N, 8-7 %.)
Oxidative degradation of acid (II). 1-4ml. of 0-735N-
NaOH were added to 161 mg. of acid (II). The solution thus
obtained gave a light-green colour with bromothymol blue.
A solution of 158 mg. of KMnO4 in 10 ml. water was added in
drops over 45 min. The reaction was carried out in a cold
room and the temperature of the mixture maintained at
540. After the reaction, the mixture was allowed to stand
for 30 min. at laboratory temperature. It was then warmed
to 30-35' in a water bath for a few minutes to coagulate the
MnO2. The precipitate was removed by centrifugation and
washed with four lots of water (total vol. 10 ml.). A sample
(0-5 ml.) was removed.
A faint turbidity developed when aqueous dimedone
solution was added to part of the sample. The remainder of
the sample was desalted. Chromatograms run with phenol-
NH8 and n-butanol-acetic acid solvents showed that the
main ninhydrin-reacting component had a lower RF than
aspartic acid. Smaller amounts of aspartic acid, compound
(1I) and compound (III) were also present. (The compound
(III) had probably been formed by reduction of compound
(II) in the desalter.)
0-75 g. of HIO4. 2H20 was added to the combined super-
natants. A slight red precipitate formed. This was removed
after 1 hr. by centrifugation and the mixture was allowed to
stand for a further 30 min. CO2 was slowly evolved during
the periodate reaction. Periodate was precipitated as the
Ba salt by addition of Ba(OH)2 in slight excess. The pre-
cipitate was washed on the centrifuge, and the combined
supernatants made slightly acid with H2SO4 and filtered.
The filtrate was distilled and the distillate collected in an
aqueous solution containing approx. 260 mg. of dimedone.
71 mg. of a dimedone derivative were obtained. Its melting
point was 1890, unchanged when mixed with an authentic
sample of the formaldehyde derivative (yield corresponding
to 25% of formaldehyde, mol. basis).
A sample of residue from the distillation was desalted.
Chromatograms showed a heavy spot corresponding in its
position with aspartic acid. The spot could not be separated
from that due to added aspartic acid on further chromato-
grams run in phenol-NH3, n-butanol-acetic acid, or collidine-
lutidine solvents. A desalted sample of the residue from the
distillationwas analysed bya quantitative chromatographic
method (Fowden, 1951). The amount of amino N in the spot
referred to above was found to correspond to a yield of 32%
(mol. basis) from the amount in the original substance.
A similar experiment gave 27% of formaldehyde.
456 I952
NEW AMINO-ACIDS IN THE GROUNDNUT PLANT
377 mg. of (II) were oxidized in a third experiment.
370 mg. of KMnO4 and 13 g. of HIO4.2H,O were used.
After the treatment with Ba(OH),, 330 mg. of dimedone
dissolved in hot water were added. The mixture was left
overnight at room temperature, and the resulting precipi-
tate filtered off and washed with cold water. 301 mg. of
formaldehyde derivative were obtained (mixed m.p. 1890,
yield 41%). The filtrate was evaporated to small bulk,
filtered, and treated with dimethyl sulphate and 33% (w/v)
NaOH (Braunstein et al. 1947). 81 mg. of fumaric acid
(29% yield) were obtained after continuous ether extrac-
tion (m.p. 2920 in a sealed tube; 2950 after crystallization
from water, unchanged on admixture of an authentic
sample).
DISCUSSION
The oxidative degradation of (II) and the synthesis
of its reduced form have provided evidence on the
basis of which the provisional structure
COOH . CH(NH2) . CH2 .C(=CHO)COOH
(y-methyleneglutamic acid) is proposed. The identi-
fication of aspartic acid by paper chromatography
after treatment of the amide with ozone indicates
that the amide is
COOH. CH(NH2)CH2 .C(=CH2) CONH2
(y-methyleneglutamine).
Steward & Thompson (1950) presented a synopsis
of the results of paper-chromatographic examina-
tion of ethanol extracts of various plant materials.
They suggested that amides may occur among a
group of acid-labile substances detected. However,
although asparagine was isolated by Vauquelin &
Robiquet (1806) and glutamine by Schulze &
Bossard (1883), no similar amino-acid amide has
been isolated before the present investigation.
The detection and isolation ofthe new amino-acid
amide (tentatively recognized as y-methylene-
glutamine) and the corresponding acid were made
possible bythetechniques ofpaper chromatography.
Among other favourable circumstances were: the
high concentration ofthe amide in the exudates, the
distinctive ninhydrin reaction of the amide and
acid, the low solubility of the acid in water, and the
fact that autolysis caused only partial deamidation
ofasparagine and glutamine, but apparently almost
complete deamidation of y-methyleneglutamine.
The autolysate from which y-methyleneglutamic
acid was isolated contained a substance (IV) which
gave a yellow-brown spot at B. 0-85 in phenol-
ammonia. Traces of the same substance were found
in the end residues from the fractional crystalliza-
tions ofthe acid, alongwithanumber ofother amino-
acids. (It is likely that non-acidic amino-acids were
retained to some extent on the De-Acidite B and
were eluted by the ammonia.) A small quantity
of (IV) was isolated from chromatograms of these
residues by elution of the appropriate parts of the
paper. After treatment with ozone, the product
contained a substance which could not be dis-
tinguished from ,-alanine on chromatograms run in
three different solvents. ,B-Alanine could be pro-
duced from ac-methylene-y-aminobutyric acid:
CH2
COOH.C.CH2.CH,.NH2 >÷ COOH.CH,.CH2.NH2
y-Aminobutyric acid and ,B-alanine, the cu-amino-
acids related to glutamic and aspartic acids re-
spectively, are now known to be widely distributed
among plants. The possible existence of an wo-
amino-acid related to y-methyleneglutamic acid is
therefore of considerable interest.
Compounds (I), (II) and (IV) were converted, in
the electrolytic cell of the desalter, to substances
which gave purple ninhydrin spots. After such
treatment, the substance formed from (II) could not
be distinguished from compound (III) by paper-
chromatographic methods. The R.'s of the sub-
stances formed from (I) - and (IV) differed only
slightly from those of the original compounds.
Apparently compounds (I) and (IV) are also
reduced to substances which give a purple colour
with ninhydrin. None of the reduced forms has been
detected in ethanolic extracts of the plant material.
Application of modem methods to amino-acid
analysis and experiments using isotopic tracers are
providing increasing evidence that glutamine,
asparagine, glutamic acid and aspartic acid are
very active metabolites. Thus interesting results
may be obtained from further work on the bio-
chemistry of the new type of amide and the corre-
sponding acid described in this paper.
SUMMARY
1. An unsaturated amino-acid anmide and the
corresponding dicarboxylic amino-acid have been
isolated from vegetative material of groundnut
plants (Arachi8 hypogaea). The acid showed no
optical activity as its sodium salt in water.
2. The provisional structures
COOH .CH(NH2)CH2 .C(-CH2)CONH2
(y-methyleneglutamine) and
COOH .CH(NH2)CH2 .C(-CH2)COOH
(y-methyleneglutamic acid) have been proposed.
3. The dicarboxylic amino-acid was reduced and
the product agreed in properties with a synthetic
preparation of y-methylglutamic acid.
4. Thenewcompoundsappearto be normal meta-
bolites of the plants, but the reduced forms were not
detected in ethanolic extracts of fresh material.
5. Evidence was obtained that a third un-
saturated amino compound was present in the auto-
lysed material.
Sincere thanks are expressed to Prof. B. S. Platt and
Prof. W. H. Pearsall for their interest in this work. The
elementary analyses were carried our byMrs V. Shersby and
MissJ. Lewisofthe National Institute for Medical Research.
45r,7
458 J. DONE AND L. FOWDEN I952
REFERENCES
Adamson, D. W. (1939). J. chem. Soc. p. 1564.
Borsook, H. & Dubnoff,J. W. (1939). J. biol. Chem. 131, 163.
Braunstein, A. E., Nemchinskaya, V. L. & Vilenkina, G. J.
(1947). Biochim. Biophy8. Acta, 1, 281.
Consden, R., Gordon, A. H. & Martin, A. J. P. (1947).
Biochem. J. 41, 590.
Dekker, C. A., Stone, D. & Fruton, J. S. (1949). J. biol.
Chem. 181, 179.
Dent, C. E. (1948). Biochem. J. 43, 169.
Done, J. & Fowden, L. (1951). Biochem. J. 49, xx.
Fowden, L. (1951). Biochem. J. 48, 327.
Marvel, C. S. & Stoddard, M. P. (1938). J. org. Chem. 3, 198.
Partridge, S. M. (1948). Biochem. J. 42, 238.
Partridge, S. M. & Brimley, R. C. (1949). Biochem. J. 44,
513.
Partridge, S. M. & Westall, R. G. (1949). Biochem. J. 44,
418.
Schulze, E. & Bossard, E. (1883). Ber. dt8ch. chem. Ge8. 16,
312.
Smith, E. Lester & Page, J. E. (1948). J. Soc. chem. Ind.,
Lond., 67, 48.
Snyder, H. R. Shekelton, J. F. & Lewis, C. D. (1945).
J. Amer. chem. Soc. 67, 310.
Steward, F. C. & Thompson, J. F. (1950). Ann. Rev. Plant
Physiol. 1, 233.
Vauquelin, L. N. & Robiquet, P. J. (1806). Ann. Chim.
(Phy8.), 57, 88.
Wieland, T. & Fischer, E. (1948). Naturwi?senschaften, 35,
29.
The Carotenoids of the Berries of Lonicera japonica
BY T. W. GOODWIN
Department of Biochemi8try, The Univer8ity of Liverpool
(Received 10 November 1951)
Although a great deal is known concerning the
distribution and occurrence of carotenoids in fruit
(see Karrer & Jucker, 1949; Goodwin, 1952 b), there
are still many gaps in our knowledge; these will
have to be filled if a rationale of carotenoid distribu-
tion in fruit is eventually to be achieved. Further-
more, studies on the minor carotenoid components of
fruit may well throw considerable light on the mode
of biogenesis of carotenoids. Only one such in-
vestigation on tomatoes has been carried out
(Porter & Lincoln, 1950); the results permitted the
authors to suggest a working hypothesis for car-
tenogenesis in this fruit.
No precise information is available on the caro-
tenoids of the berries of the family Caprifoliaceae,
although early workers had indicated the presence
of lipochromes (carotenoids) in Lonicera tartarica
(Schimper, 1885), L. xylo8teum (Schimper, 1885;
Molisch, 1896; Kohl, 1902; Nowak & Zellner, 1921);
Sambucu,8nigra (Nowak & Zellner, 1921), Viburnum
opuli8 and V. lantana (Wisselingh, 1914; Nowak &
Zellner, 1921; Kryz, 1919). When a small crop of
ripe berries of a cultivated climbing honeysuckle
(Lonicera japonica) became available an investiga-
tion was undertaken into the nature of the caro-
tenoids present, with special emphasis on the minor
components.
EXPERIMENTAL
Materials. The fully ripened berries were obtained from a
garden in north-west Cheshire. Two portions ofabout 200 g.
each were examined separately with identical results.
Extraction and 8eparation of the carotenoids
The fresh berries were ground to a fine powder with
Na,SO4 and the powder extracted with successive portions of
diethyl ether (freshly distilled over reduced iron) until no
further colour was extracted. The combined ether extracts
were taken to dryness in vacuo at room temperature and the
lipids saponified by adding to the residue 1 ml. of 60%
(w/v) aqueous KOH and 5 ml. of ethanol, mixing and allow-
ing to stand overnight at room temperature. The unsaponi-
flable matter was extracted into ether as described by
Goodwin & Morton (1946) and the ether was removed in
vacuo; the residue was dissolved in a small volume of light
petroleum (b.p. 40}60°) and examined chromatographically.
Petroleum, b.p. 40600°, was used throughout this investiga-
tion.
Separation 1. A preliminary separation of the pigment
mixture was first carried out on alumina (Spence, Grade 'O')
deactivated with methanol (Goodwin, 1952a) using light
petroleum containing 10% (v/v) of ether as developer. The
resulting chromatogram is described in Table 1.
Separation 2. Fraction 1 (Table 1), which eventually
percolates through the column, was collected in the filtrate,
the mixed solvents removed in vacuo and the residue re-
dissolved in light petroleum and chromatographed on
activated alumina (Spence, Grade 'O'). Five fractions were
obtained as recorded in Table 2.
Separation 3. Zone 6 (Table 1) was eluted with ethanol.
The ethanol was removed in vacuo at 300 and the residue
dissolved in a few drops of ether and made to approx. 10 ml.
with light petroleum. This treatment is necessary because
this fraction will not dissolve directly in light petroleum.
Chromatography was carried out on a column of ZnCO3
using benzene as developer. Four zones were obtained, two
of which eventually moved down the column to be collected
