Quantifying Protein Synthesis and Degradation inArabidopsis by Dynamic 13CO2 Labeling and Analysis ofEnrichment in Individual Amino Acids in Their FreePools and in Protein1[OPEN]Hirofumi Ishihara, Toshihiro Obata, Ronan Sulpice2, Alisdair R. Fernie, and Mark Stitt*Max Planck Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology, 14476 Potsdam-Golm, GermanyORCID IDs: 0000-0002-7658-0473 (H.I.); 0000-0001-8931-7722 (T.O.); 0000-0002-6113-9570 (R.S.).Protein synthesis and degradation represent substantial costs during plant growth. To obtain a quantitative measure of the rate ofprotein synthesis and degradation, we supplied 13CO2 to intact Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) Columbia-0 plants and analyzedenrichment in free amino acids and in amino acid residues in protein during a 24-h pulse and 4-d chase. While many free amino acidslabeled slowly and incompletely, alanine showed a rapid rise in enrichment in the pulse and a decrease in the chase. Enrichment infree alanine was used to correct enrichment in alanine residues in protein and calculate the rate of protein synthesis. The latter wascompared with the relative growth rate to estimate the rate of protein degradation. The relative growth rate was estimated fromsequential determination of fresh weight, sequential images of rosette area, and labeling of glucose in the cell wall. In an 8-hphotoperiod, protein synthesis and cell wall synthesis were 3-fold faster in the day than at night, protein degradation was slow(3%–4% d21), and ﬂux to growth and degradation resulted in a protein half-life of 3.5 d. In the starchless phosphoglucomutasemutantat night, protein synthesis was further decreased and protein degradation increased, while cell wall synthesis was totally inhibited,quantitatively accounting for the inhibition of growth in this mutant. We also investigated the rates of protein synthesis anddegradation during leaf development, during growth at high temperature, and compared synthesis rates of Rubisco large andsmall subunits of in the light and dark.Protein synthesis accounts for a signiﬁcant part of theenergy required for plant growth (Penning de Vries et al.,1974; Penning de Vries, 1975; Amthor, 2000). The rate ofprotein synthesis can be qualitatively assessed by inves-tigating the proportion of ribosomes loaded into poly-somes (Bailey-Serres, 1999; Beilharz and Preiss, 2004).Polysome loading decreases in various stress treatments,including water deﬁcit (Hsiao, 1970; Kawaguchi et al.,2003, 2004) and hypoxia (Branco-Price et al., 2005, 2008).In nonstressed plants in a light/dark cycle, polysomeloading is high in the light and decreases in the dark(Piques et al., 2009; Pal et al., 2013). Polysome loading isincreased by sugar addition to cell cultures (Nicolaï et al.,2006) and is closely correlated with Suc levels duringdiurnal cycles in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) ro-settes (Pal et al., 2013). Information about polysomeloading and ribosome abundance has been used tomodel the rate of protein synthesis in Arabidopsis ro-settes (Piques et al., 2009; Pal et al., 2013). This approachindicated that the rate of protein synthesis is higher inthe daytime than at night, when it is constrained by therate of starch degradation and the resulting availabilityof carbon (C) and energy. It also indicated that the globalrate of protein synthesis is only slightly higher than thatneeded for growth, indicating that there is only a lowrate of protein degradation.Protein degradation is required to repair damagedproteins, to adjust the protein complement to environ-mental conditions, and to remobilize and recycle aminoacids (Huffaker and Peterson, 1974; Nelson et al., 2014b).Protein degradation is thought to make a major impacton growth efﬁciency (Amthor, 2000). It has been esti-mated that protein degradation accounts for 20% to 30%of the ATP produced by root respiration (Scheurwateret al., 2000). Protein degradation is accelerated in lownitrogen (Lattanzi et al., 2005; Lehmeier et al., 2013) andby shading (Pons et al., 1993; Scheurwater et al., 2000);this may promote nitrogen remobilization to youngleaves in more favorable light conditions. Protein deg-radation is accelerated under C starvation to provide analternative source of C for respiration (Brouquisse et al.,1991; Araújo et al., 2011; Izumi et al., 2013; Pilkingtonet al., 2015). Protein degradation may also increase1 This work was supported by the Max Planck Society and theEuropean Union (collaborative project TiMet under contract no.245143).2 Present address: National University of Galway, Plant SystemsBiology Laboratory, Plant and AgriBiosciences Research Centre, Bot-any and Plant Science, Aras de Brun, University Road, Galway, Re-public of Ireland.* Address correspondence to mstitt@mpimp-golm.mpg.de.The author responsible for distribution of materials integral to theﬁndings presented in this article in accordance with the policy de-scribed in the Instructions for Authors (www.plantphysiol.org) is:Mark Stitt (mstitt@mpimp-golm.mpg.de).[OPEN] Articles can be viewed without a subscription.www.plantphysiol.org/cgi/doi/10.1104/pp.15.0020974 Plant Physiology, May 2015, Vol. 168, pp. 74–93, www.plantphysiol.org  2015 American Society of Plant Biologists. All Rights Reserved. www.plantphysiol.orgon May 5, 2019 - Published by Downloaded from Copyright © 2015 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.under other stresses, including high temperature inwheat (Triticum aestivum) roots (Ferguson et al., 1990)and osmotic stress in barley (Hordeum vulgare) leaves(Dungey and Davies, 1982). It may also change duringleaf development, with various studies indicating thatdegradation is higher in expanding than in fully grownleaves (Schaefer et al., 1981; Barneix et al., 1988) and alsoincreases in old leaves (Dungey and Davies, 1982;Bouma et al., 1994).Protein half-life depends on the rate of degradationand on the rate at which preexisting protein is diluted bygrowth. Global protein half-life was estimated to be 4 to8 d in grass roots (Scheurwater et al., 2000). A similarprotein half-life was predicted by modeling in Arabidopsisrosettes (Piques et al., 2009) and by experimental studiesof 508 individual proteins in barley leaves (Nelson et al.,2014a).The rate of protein synthesis is usually measured bysupplying a pulse of a labeled precursor, often followedby a chase in the absence of label, and monitoring thetemporal kinetics of label incorporation and depletion(Huffaker and Peterson, 1974; Nelson et al., 2014b).While radioisotopes were used in the past, stable iso-topes are easier to detect and quantify in speciﬁc com-pounds. Labeling experiments should meet severalcriteria. First, the labeled precursor must be suppliedwithout surgical or other disturbance of the plant, as thismay alter the rates of protein synthesis and degradation.Second, the supplied labeled precursor should not alterinternal metabolite pools or ﬂuxes. Third, movement oflabel per se does not provide information about ﬂux.This requires information about the extent to which theincoming label is diluted by internal pools. Fourth, ac-curate measurements of the rate of growth are requiredto assess how much of the protein synthesis representsﬂux to growth and how much represents protein turn-over (viz., the replacement of degraded proteins). Manystudies in the past did not meet all these criteria; inparticular, they rarely measured enrichment in the freeamino acid precursor pools.Labeled amino acids have been widely used in mi-crobes to study protein synthesis. To decrease dilutionby internal pools, an amino acid is used that the microbecannot synthesize. Similar approaches have been used inhuman cell cultures (Ong et al., 2002; Ong and Mann,2006). While labeled amino acids have also been used inalgae and plants, the resulting data are usually qualita-tive. In contrast to microbes and animals, plants are ableto synthesize all proteinaceous amino acids. As a result,the supplied labeled amino acid is diluted by endoge-nously synthesized amino acid and may also be catab-olized and converted to other amino acids that areincorporated into protein. Differential uptake and in-ternal ﬂuxes of amino acids can lead to complex tem-poral labeling kinetics and inhomogenous labeling ofproteins, depending on which amino acid is supplied(He et al., 1991). In a comparison of [2H]Leu, [13C]Arg,and [2H]Lys labeling, Gruhler et al. (2005) concludedthat all three substrates showed label dilution, andto varying extents. While stable isotopes of Lys areincorporated into the proteome with an enrichment of83% to 91% in the dark, this falls to 58% in the light(Schütz et al., 2011). Another problem in plants is thatlabeled amino acids need to be added at high levels togenerate a large increase in isotope abundance, whichcan alter metabolite pools and ﬂuxes. Problems can alsoarise due to complex patterns of feedback regulationin amino acid biosynthesis pathways (Galili, 2002). Inmammals, individual amino acids like Leu regulate andmodify the rate of protein turnover (Buse and Reid,1975; Pannemans et al., 1997). An additional complica-tion in plants is that some amino acids are involved infurther metabolic pathways. Examples include the useof Gly and Ser in photorespiration, Trp for auxin syn-thesis (Rapparini et al., 1999), and the aromatic aminoacids Phe, Tyr, and Trp as precursors for the synthesis ofphenylpropanoids and ﬂavonoids (Fraser and Chapple,2011).Protein synthesis can also be measured using stableisotopes of water. Movement of label from H218Ointo amino acids is rather slow (Zhou et al., 2012). Labelmoves rapidly from 2H2O into amino acids and proteins(Mitra et al., 1976; Yang et al., 2010), but discriminationagainst 2H2O can lead to changes in metabolite pools andﬂuxes, to changes in gene expression indicative of stress,and to inhibition of growth (Thomson et al., 1963; Sacchiand Cocucci, 1992; Kushner et al., 1999; Yang et al., 2010).Yang et al. (2010) showed that inhibitory effects ongrowth can be decreased, although not totally prevented,by decreasing enrichment to 30% and that the stress-related changes in transcript levels were less markedwhen a protocol was used in which seedlings werepulsed with 2H2O and the labeling kinetics were an-alyzed in a chase with water. However, while 2H2O canbe readily supplied to seedlings, movement through alarger plant is likely to be slow and rather heterogenous.Another approach is to supply 15NO3 or15NH4 to themedium of algae (Martin et al., 2012; Mastrobuoniet al., 2012) or the rooting medium of higher plants(Masclaux-Daubresse and Chardon, 2011; Nelsonet al., 2014a, 2014b). Labeling with 15N is especiallyuseful in studies that use liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry to analyze the labeling ki-netics of signature peptides of individual proteins (Liet al., 2012; Nelson et al., 2014a, 2014b). However,there are some disadvantages in higher plants, in-cluding the rather slow labeling kinetics of amino acids(Yang et al., 2010). This may be due to the time thatelapses until the label is transported through the plantand assimilated as well as to dilution by large internalpools (Lattanzi et al., 2005; Lehmeier et al., 2013). Thisalso makes it difﬁcult to rapidly and completely remove15NO3 or15NH4 in a chase.Label can also be introduced as 13CO2 in the atmos-phere. This has three potential advantages. First, 13CO2is immediately incorporated into metabolism via pho-tosynthesis, allowing the introduction of isotope intointact plants without any perturbation of metabolismand growth. Second, 13CO2 and unlabeled CO2 and berapidly interchanged, allowing rapid commencement ofPlant Physiol. Vol. 168, 2015 75Protein Synthesis and Degradation in Arabidopsis www.plantphysiol.orgon May 5, 2019 - Published by Downloaded from Copyright © 2015 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.a pulse and rapid and complete removal of external la-bel at the start of a chase. Third, at least in principle,13CO2 should label all amino acids.13CO2 labeling hasbeen used to investigate ﬂuxes in photosynthetic me-tabolism in algae (Huege et al., 2007; Young et al., 2011)and higher plants (Szecowka et al., 2013; Ma et al., 2014).It has also been used to investigate the synthesis anddegradation of a small set of abundant proteins (Chenet al., 2011). However, quantitative measurements arecomplicated by slow and incomplete changes in en-richment in amino acids. In a recent study, we showedthat the rate and extent of labeling of amino acids by13CO2 is highly variable; after a 60-min pulse, someamino acids like Ala were quite highly (more than 70%)labeled, others like Phe, Gly, and Ser were only moder-ately (20%–40%) labeled, and many, including Glu, Thr,Lys, Leu, Ile, Pro, and Asn, were very slowly and in-completely (less than 10%) labeled (Szecowka et al., 2013).Here, we present a relatively simple approach thatuses 13CO2 pulse-chase analysis to measure the globalrate of protein synthesis and degradation in intact soil-grown Arabidopsis plants. After labeling, gas chroma-tography time-of-ﬂight mass spectrometry (GC-TOF-MS)is used to analyze enrichment in a large number of freeamino acids and in their residues in protein. We identifywhich free amino acids show the cleanest labeling ki-netics and use enrichment in these pools and the corre-sponding amino acid residues in protein to estimatethe rates of protein synthesis and degradation. Wealso present a related method to quantify ﬂux to cellwall polysaccharides.RESULTSExperimental DesignSzecowka et al. (2013) applied a pulse of 13CO2 forvarious times up to 60 min, starting in the middle ofthe photoperiod after metabolic steady state had beenachieved, to allow the computationally demandingmodeling of ﬂuxes in central metabolism. Based on theslow and incomplete labeling kinetics of amino acids bySzecowka et al. (2013) and estimates of the rate ofprotein synthesis based on ribosome abundance andusage (Piques et al., 2009), we reasoned that a longerpulse would be required to measure ﬂux into protein.We decided to pulse for an entire day/night cycle andto chase for 4 d, taking samples at various times duringthis treatment. We also decided to commence labelingat dawn to minimize isotope dilution by internal pools,which are usually small at dawn (Gibon et al., 2006,2009; Sulpice et al., 2014). In particular, starch is verylow at dawn, accumulates in the light, and is remobi-lized to provide C for respiration and growth at night(Smith and Stitt, 2007; Stitt and Zeeman, 2012). By la-beling from dawn onward, we hoped to achieve a highenrichment in starch that would allow high enrichment tobe maintained in metabolites at night. To prevent dilu-tion by dark ﬁxation during the night, the 13CO2pulse was continued through until dawn.Arabidopsis Columbia-0 (Col-0) plants were grown ina controlled climate chamber on soil under a shortphotoperiod (8 h of light/16 h of dark) for 18 d andtransferred into two labeling chambers for 3 d beforestarting the labeling experiment. The labeling chamberswere located inside the climate chamber, and each waslarge enough to hold 17 10-cm-diameter pots with ﬁveplants per pot. The chambers were ﬂushed (5 L min21)with humidiﬁed air mixtures (79% N2, 21% oxygen)containing 450 mL L21 unlabeled or labeled CO2. TheCO2 concentration reﬂected that measured in the climatechamber. The pulse was started by switching from un-labeled CO2 to13CO2 just before dawn on day 21, andthe chase was started by switching from 13CO2 to un-labeled CO2 at the following dawn. To prevent incor-poration of label by plants that were being grown forsubsequent experiments, the air mix exiting the labelingchamber was passed through a soda lime column. Inroutine experiments, plants were harvested at seventime points: at dawn just before starting the pulse (tomeasure natural enrichment), after 4 and 8 h in light, justbefore dawn at the end of the pulse, during the chase 4 hinto ﬁrst light period, and at dawn 1 and 4 d later. Theextracts were separated into soluble and insoluble frac-tions and analyzed by GC-TOF-MS to determine en-richment in the individual free amino acids in thesoluble fraction and, after chemical hydrolysis of theinsoluble fraction, in the individual amino acids inprotein. Although the analysis required only smallamounts (20 mg fresh weight) of leaf material, for rou-tine work, we typically pooled ﬁve rosettes per sample.In parallel, we measured the rate of rosette growth byweighing rosettes harvested at each sampled time pointand by acquiring sequential images of the rosette area.Enrichment Kinetics of Free Amino AcidsWe were able to quantify enrichment in 16 free aminoacids (Fig. 1; Supplemental Table S1A). The temporalkinetics of enrichment varies between amino acids andwas often slow and incomplete. During the pulse, en-richment of individual amino acids ranged between 83%and 11% at the end of day and between 71% and 15%at the end of night. During the chase, enrichment de-creased rapidly for some amino acids and slowly forothers. This underlines the importance of informationabout enrichment in free amino acid pools for accurateestimation of the rate of protein synthesis.We were searching for amino acids that showed arapid increase to high enrichment in the light, retainedhigh enrichment during the pulse in the night, and un-derwent a rapid and nearly complete decrease in en-richment in the chase. Ala showed the fastest and mostcomplete increase of enrichment in the pulse (79%, 81%,and 65% after 4 and 8 h of illumination and at the end ofnight, respectively) and a rapid decrease in enrichmentin the chase. Asp showed slightly lower enrichment. Alaand Asp are synthesized via reversible aminotransferasereactions from the central metabolites pyruvate and76 Plant Physiol. Vol. 168, 2015Ishihara et al. www.plantphysiol.orgon May 5, 2019 - Published by Downloaded from Copyright © 2015 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.oxaloacetate, respectively. Ser and Gly also showed arapid increase in enrichment in the light, but their en-richment decreased during the night (from 83% and 76%at dusk to 53% and 15% at dawn). Their rapid labelingin the light reﬂects their formation during photorespir-ation; reasons for the decline during the night will bediscussed later. Glu and Gln showed relatively slowlabeling in the light (22% and 22% after 4 h of illumi-nation and 57% and 53% after 8 h of illumination, re-spectively) and a further rise during the night (65% and71% at dawn, respectively). The slow labeling in thelight was unexpected, because these amino acids arederived via aminotransferase reactions from the centralorganic acid a-oxoglutarate and are also intermediatesin the GOGAT pathway, which is very active in the light(see “Discussion”). Most other amino acids are synthe-sized via long biosynthetic pathways. Enrichment in thearomatic amino acids (Phe and Tyr) rose quite quickly inthe light and decreased rapidly in the chase, but theywere labeled more slowly than Ala and also showed amarked decrease at night during the pulse. Ile, Leu, Lys,Met, and Val showed a gradual increase in enrichmentduring the light period, incomplete enrichment at dusk(44%–58%), a decrease in enrichment at night during thepulse, and a slow decrease in enrichment during thechase. The slowest labeling kinetic was found for Pro.Figure 1. Enrichment kinetics of free amino acids and amino acids in protein in Col-0 growing in an 8-h photoperiod. Thetemporal kinetics of enrichment in 16 free amino acids (black lines) are shown as well as, for 12 of these, the kinetics ofenrichment of the amino acid residue in protein (red lines).The x axis depicts time during the pulse and the chase (depicted withred and blue bars at the top of each graph, respectively). The y axis shows the percentage enrichment in the free amino acid orthe amino acid residue in protein. The light period and night are indicated by white and gray shading, respectively. Col-0 wasgrown for 21 d in an 8-h photoperiod and then pulsed with 13CO2 for 24 h, followed by a 4-d chase. Plants were harvested atdawn before the start of the pulse, after 4 and 8 h in the light, at the next dawn at the end of the pulse, at 4 h in the first lightperiod of the chase, and at dawn at the end of days 1 and 4 of the chase. Each harvest comprised four pots, each containing fiveplants. The experiment was performed four times with separately grown batches of plants. The data are provided inSupplemental Data Set S1, the calculated enrichment in free amino acids and amino acids in protein in Supplemental Table S1,plots of individual isotopomers in Figure 2 and Supplemental Figure S2, and the calculated rates of protein synthesis anddegradation in Table I. The plots show average (m) of four biological replicates with SD (m6 SD). Error bars are omitted when theyare smaller than the symbol. DAHP, 3-Deoxy-D-arabino-heptulosonic acid 7-phosphate; PEP, phosphoenolpyruvate; 3PGA,3-phosphoglyceraldehyde.Plant Physiol. Vol. 168, 2015 77Protein Synthesis and Degradation in Arabidopsis www.plantphysiol.orgon May 5, 2019 - Published by Downloaded from Copyright © 2015 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.Slow and incomplete labeling kinetics can result forseveral reasons, including dilution of label by internalpools, synthesis of amino acids from unlabeled pre-cursors, or the presence of compartmented pools withdifferent labeling kinetics. We inspected our data toprovide insights into the contribution of these differentfactors.Our GC-TOF-MS analysis provided informationabout enrichment in sugars and organic acids(Supplemental Fig. S1; Supplemental Table S1A). La-beling of malate was rapid and high in the pulse (73%,79%, and 79% after 4 and 8 h of illumination and at thefollowing dawn, respectively) and decreased rapidly inthe chase. Enrichment was slightly lower in fumarateand succinate. Enrichment of pyruvate was high in thelight (71% and 77% after 4 and 8 h, respectively), de-clined at night (35%), and declined rapidly in the chase.Enrichment in citrate was very low in the light (less than1%), rose strongly in the night (52%), remained at thislevel for the ﬁrst 4 h of the chase in the light, and de-creased by the following dawn. The slow labeling of Gluand Gln in the light may be a consequence of the slowlabeling of citrate (see “Discussion”). Labeling of Sucand reducing sugars was slow and incomplete in thepulse and declined slowly in the chase. They may pro-vide a source of unlabeled C in the night.We inspected the detailed labeling pattern of eachamino acid to learn whether there are strongly com-partmented pools of any of the amino acids. If an aminoacid occurs as a single pool or as multiple pools that arein relatively rapid exchange, during the pulse the unla-beled C0 isotopomer (i.e. all C atoms are unlabeled) willdecrease to a low value, intermediate isotopomers witha low number of 13C atoms will rise transiently and thendecrease to a low value, and heavily labeled isotopomersthat consist predominantly or entirely of labeled atomswill rise to a high value. This pattern is seen in the lightfor Ala (Fig. 2A), Gly, Ser, and Asp (Supplemental Fig.S2) and, somewhat more slowly, for Met. If incompletelabeling of an amino acid is due to slow labeling ofone pool, the same pattern will be followed, but moreslowly. This pattern is seen for Glu (Fig. 2B) and Gln(Supplemental Fig. S2). If incomplete labeling is due tothe presence of two or more pools, of which one or moreis not labeled or is only very slowly labeled, the C0isotopomer will decrease to an intermediate value, andthe remainder of the pool will be present as heavily la-beled isotopomers. This pattern was seen at dusk for Lys(Fig. 2C), Pro, Tyr, Phe, Val, Leu, and Ile (SupplementalFig. S2).We also investigated whether some amino acidswere present at a much higher level at dusk than atdawn. Such diurnal changes are due probably tosynthesis of the amino acid from newly ﬁxed C in thelight and use of this pool at night. This will lead to anycompartmented unlabeled pools making only a smallcontribution to the total pool at dusk but a large con-tribution at dawn. This analysis was only possible forthe amino acids for which standards were included inthe GC-TOF-MS analysis to allow quantiﬁcation. Therewas an especially large increase for the photorespiratoryintermediate Gly (37-fold) and a smaller increase forSer (3.7-fold; Supplemental Table S2). Based on otherstudies, we can also expect a large diurnal change forGln (Foyer et al., 2003; Fritz et al., 2006; Tschoep et al.,2009).Enrichment Kinetics of Amino Acids in ProteinGC-TOF-MS analysis of the protein hydrolysateprovided enrichment data for 12 amino acids (Fig. 1;Supplemental Table S1B; Gln, Asn, Met, and Tyr couldnot be reliably detected in the hydolysate). In total, 12amino acids were detected in both the free and proteinpools.Enrichment of amino acids in protein increased dur-ing the pulse in the light and rose further in the night,Figure 2. Labeling kinetics for all detected isotopomers of the freeamino acid pools. A, Ala. B, Glu. C, Lys. C0, C1, C2, C3, and CXcorrespond to the isotopomer with no 13C atoms (i.e. all atoms areunlabeled), with one 13C atom, with two 13C atoms, with three 13Catoms, and with x 13C atoms, respectively. The experimental design isdescribed in the legend of Figure 1. The data are provided inSupplemental Data Set S1, and the calculated enrichment values areprovided in Supplemental Table S1.78 Plant Physiol. Vol. 168, 2015Ishihara et al. www.plantphysiol.orgon May 5, 2019 - Published by Downloaded from Copyright © 2015 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.although more slowly than in the light. This providesqualitative evidence that protein synthesis continues atnight. Enrichment at the end of the 24-h pulse variedmore than 2-fold, depending on the amino acid. Likefree amino acids, the highest enrichment was found forAla, Gly, and Ser (20.7%, 20.1%, and 20.2%, respectively),with somewhat lower enrichment in Asp (15.4%). Thelowest enrichment was for Pro (8.3%).We investigated whether these differences in enrich-ment in protein could be explained by the differences inaverage enrichment of the free amino acids. To do this,we plotted the increase in enrichment of the amino acidin protein during the light period against the enrichmentin the free amino acid pool at dusk (Supplemental Fig.S3A). A similar plot was made comparing the increase inenrichment of the amino acid in protein during the nightwith the enrichment in the free amino acid pool at dawn(Supplemental Fig. S3B). A small group of amino acidsshowed high enrichment in the free pool and a high rateof incorporation into protein. This group included Ala inthe light and dark, Ser in the light and dark, Gly in thelight, and Glu in the dark. Another group, including Aspin the light and dark and Phe and Glu in the light,showed slower label incorporation into protein than ex-pected from the enrichment in the free pool. This mayreﬂect slow labeling kinetics, which would result in theaverage enrichment of the free pool at dawn or duskbeing higher than the average during the preceding timeinterval. Another group, including Lys and Pro in thelight and Gly, Pro, Leu, Ile, and Lys in the dark, showedhigher label incorporation into protein than expectedfrom enrichment in the free amino acid. This might beexplained by the presence of a weakly labeled or unla-beled pool, with the result that the actual precursor poolhas a higher enrichment than the average value. Anothergroup, including Thr and Val in the light and dark, Leuand Lys in the light, and Phe in the dark, showed asimilar relationship to Ala and Ser, but with lower en-richment and lower incorporation rates into protein.While this might indicate that there is one slowly labeledpool of these amino acids, inspection of the labeling ki-netics of their isotopomers (see above; Supplemental Fig.S2) makes it more likely that the situation is actuallymore complex, with a combination of slow labeling ki-netics for one pool and the presence of a weakly or un-labeled pool. Overall, this analysis and that of Figures1 and 2 and Supplemental Figures S2 and S3 suggest thatmultiple factors contribute to the complex labeling ki-netics of free amino acids.The washout kinetics in protein during the chasewere analyzed with semilog plots (Supplemental Fig.S4). Ala, Ser, and Gly had the fastest washout (slopesof 20.23, 20.24, and 20.21), with smaller slopes forother amino acids (20.18 to 20.11 and even slower forPro). This shows that, for many amino acids, incom-plete loss of label in free pools complicates proteinlabeling kinetics during the chase.Determination of the Relative Growth RateEstimation of the rate of protein degradation re-quires information about the rate of growth. Growthrates are usually given as the relative growth rate(RGR), which is the gain in biomass per unit of existingbiomass per day (Poorter and Nagel, 2000). We mea-sured RGR by ﬁtting a regression to a semilog plot ofthe fresh weight of the plants harvested during thepulse and chase. Such measurements are subject toexperimental error because different plants are har-vested at each time point and weight varies betweenindividual plants. This could affect the accuracy of ourcalculation of protein degradation. We took twoapproaches to validate our estimates of RGR. First, wetook sequential images of sets of plants grown in par-allel with those that were used for destructive analyses.Destructive harvesting and time-lapse image analysis werein good agreement; in this experiment, they provided es-timates for RGR of 0.224 and 0.215 mm2 mm22 d21, re-spectively (Supplemental Fig. S5). Second, we determinedRGR by destructive harvesting in three separate largeexperiments performed on plants growing in the sameconditions during the time when we were carrying outour labeling studies. The values were very similar(average [m] 6 SD = 0.221 6 0.002; Supplemental Fig.S5). For routine estimates of protein degradation, weused the average estimate of RGR from all these rep-licated experiments.Estimation of the Rate of Protein Synthesisand DegradationThe rate of protein synthesis, Ks, was estimated fromlabel incorporation into Ala in protein, with a correctionTable I. Estimated rates of protein synthesis and degradation for Col-0 grown in an 8-h photoperiodCol-0 was grown for 21 d in an 8-h photoperiod and then pulsed with 13CO2 for 24 h, followed by a 4-d chase. The experimental design isdescribed in the legend of Figure 1. The data are provided in Supplemental Data Set S1 and calculated enrichment values in Supplemental Table S1.The rate of protein synthesis was calculated by correcting enrichment in Ala in protein by the enrichment in free Ala at the end of the day. Thecalculations of protein degradation used an RGR of 0.221 mg fresh weight mg21 fresh weight d21, which was the average of three biological replicateexperiments in these growth conditions (Supplemental Fig. S5). Results are estimated from the average of four biological replicates.RGRProtein Synthesis Protein Degradation Half-LifeAverage 24-h Cycle Light (per Hour) Dark (per Hour) Light:Dark Ratio Pulse Chase Pulse Chasemg mg21 d21 % total protein % total protein d21 d0.221 25.62 1.95 0.63 3.1 3.52 3.07 3.11 3.49Plant Physiol. Vol. 168, 2015 79Protein Synthesis and Degradation in Arabidopsis www.plantphysiol.orgon May 5, 2019 - Published by Downloaded from Copyright © 2015 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.for enrichment in free Ala (see “Discussion”; Pocrnjicet al., 1983) using the equation:Ks ¼ ÆSBðt2Þæ2 ÆSBðt1ÞæÆSAðt22 t1Þæ3100t22 t1ð%  per hÞwhere ÆSBðt1Þæ and ÆSBðt2Þæ represent average label in-corporation into Ala in protein at the start and end ofthe analyzed time interval, ÆSAðt22 t1Þæ is the averageenrichment of free Ala at the end of the light period(see “Discussion”), and (t2 2 t1) is the duration of thetime interval in hours. The rate of synthesis is given asthe percentage of the initial protein synthesized in thetime interval. To calculate the rate of protein synthesisrate in the light period, t2 was the end of the lightperiod (8 h), and t1 was the start of the pulse (0 h).To calculate protein synthesis rate in the dark, t2 wasthe end of the 24-h pulse, and t1 was the end of thelight period (8 h).The estimated rate of protein synthesis in the lightperiod (1.95% h21) was about 3-fold higher than that atnight (0.63% h21). However, as the plants were in an8-h photoperiod, the amount of protein synthesized atnight was 61% of that synthesized in the light period.The protein synthesized during a 24-h cycle was equiv-alent to about 26% of the protein in the rosette.The rate of protein degradation, Kd, was estimatedin two ways. The ﬁrst approach is based on the dif-ference between the estimated rate of protein synthesisin the pulse, Ks, and the rate of protein synthesisneeded to sustain the observed rate of growth. It iscalculated as:Kd ¼ ðKs2RGR3PpÞ3 100  ð% per dÞwhere Pp is the fractional change in rosette proteincontent per day during the pulse. The second approachcalculates the rate of protein degradation as the differ-ence between the measured decrease in enrichment inAla in protein during the chase and the decrease thatwould be expected due to dilution by growth (Yeeet al., 2010) as:Kd ¼ ð2 kLoss2RGR3PcÞ3 100  ð% per dÞwhere kLoss is the rate constant for the loss of label inAla in protein per day and Pc is the fractional changein rosette protein content per day during the chase.kLoss was calculated for Ala by applying linear regres-sion of the natural log-transformed enrichment valueversus time over at least three time points. The verylow enrichment in free Ala during the chase allowedus to ignore recycling of label into protein. The ro-sette protein concentration did not change signiﬁ-cantly between days 19 and 26 after germination(Supplemental Data Set S1). This allowed us to setthe protein concentration terms (Pp and Pc) at unityfor the calculation of protein degradation in rosettes.The rate of protein degradation (i.e. protein synthesis inexcess of that required for growth) per 24-h cycle was es-timated at 3.5% d21 from the pulse data and 3.1% d21 fromthe chase data. Thus, the majority of the protein syn-thesis (26% d21) represents ﬂux to growth, rather thandegradation. Combining the dilution of protein bygrowth with the rate of protein degradation yielded aglobal protein half-life of 3.1 to 3.5 d.Different Leaf Growth StagesWe next applied this method to investigate the rate ofprotein synthesis and degradation at different stages ofleaf development. Ribosome abundance (Dean andLeech, 1982) and, by implication, the rate of proteinsynthesis are high in young growing leaves and low inmature leaves. Leaves at six stages of development (Fig.3A) were harvested at the beginning and end of a 24-hpulse and processed to provide information about theenrichment of free amino acids and of amino acids inprotein (Supplemental Data Set S2). As large numbers ofplants were required to provide enough material for theyoung leaves, we did not attempt to separate ﬂuxes inthe light period and night. We did not apply a chaseover 4 d because in this time the leaves will change theirdevelopmental stage. Leaf relative growth rate (LRGR)was estimated from images of individual leaves on se-quential days spanning the pulse (Fig. 3B). It should benoted that the oldest leaves are still growing slowly. Therate of protein synthesis was calculated from the averageenrichment of free Ala (81%) in a subsample of wholerosettes harvested at the end of the light period. Thiswas validated by checking that Ala enrichment at dawnat the end of the pulse was similar in all six leaf stages atdawn at the end of the pulse (Fig. 3C) but lower than atdusk, as was seen previously. The estimated rate ofprotein synthesis was fastest (42.8% d21) in the youngestrapidly growing leaf (LRGR = 0.48) and lowest (15.6%–16% d21) in the oldest leaves (LRGR = 0.12–0.13; Fig. 3D;Supplemental Table S3).To calculate protein degradation, we compared therate of protein synthesis with the amount of proteinrequired for growth. In this case, it was necessary toinclude information about the decrease in protein con-centration during leaf development. The daily decreasein protein concentration at each leaf stage was estimatedin a separate experiment, in which the rate of leaf initi-ation was scored and leaves 1 to 6 were harvested from21-d-old plants to determine fresh weight and proteinconcentration at each leaf stage (Supplemental Data SetS2). The decrease in leaf protein was estimated as 12%,15%, 1%, and 16% d21 for leaves 6, 5, 4, and 3, respec-tively. The estimated requirement for protein for growthdecreased from about 42% d21 in the youngest leaves to12% d21 in the oldest leaves (Fig. 3D). At all leaf stages,most of the protein synthesis represented ﬂux to growth(Fig. 3D). The estimated rate of protein degradation wasnegligible in the young leaves and about 8%, 3%, and4% d21 in leaves 3, 2, and 1, respectively. The estimates80 Plant Physiol. Vol. 168, 2015Ishihara et al. www.plantphysiol.orgon May 5, 2019 - Published by Downloaded from Copyright © 2015 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.in young leaves are subject to error because they rep-resent the difference between two large values, both ofwhich are susceptible to experimental noise. The valuesfound in the mature leaves resemble those seen in amature rosette, as expected because mature leaves con-tribute most of the rosette biomass.Higher Growth TemperatureHigh temperature results in an increase in respira-tion, especially maintenance respiration (Penning deVries et al., 1979; Amthor, 2000; Pyl et al., 2012). Whilethe main maintenance costs are thought to includeprotein turnover and the maintenance of electrical, pH,and ion gradients across membranes (Penning de Vries,1975; Amthor, 2000), they are difﬁcult to quantify frommolecular information (Amthor, 2000; Cheung et al.,2013; Sweetlove et al., 2014). We applied our method toinvestigate whether higher temperature leads to a majorincrease in the rate of protein degradation.We grew Arabidopsis in an 8-h photoperiod at 20°Cor 28°C for 21 d, applied a 13CO2 pulse for 24 h, har-vested plants at dawn at the end of the pulse and after a1-, 2-, 3-, or 4-d chase, determined the enrichment of freeAla and of Ala in protein, and estimated the rate ofprotein synthesis and, by comparison with parallelmeasurements of RGR, the rate of protein degradation(Table II; data provided in Supplemental Data Set S3).Protein synthesis was 15% higher at 28°C than at 20°C(Table II). As we did not collect samples at dusk, weused the enrichment data at dawn to estimate proteinsynthesis rates. This may result in a slight overestima-tion, because enrichment in free Ala decreases slightlyduring the night. For this reason, we did not attempt touse data from the pulse to estimate degradation rates.Figure 3. Leaf growth rates, protein synthesis rates, and protein degradation at different stages of leaf development. Col-0 wasgrown for 21 d in an 8-h photoperiod and then pulsed with 13CO2 for 24 h. Plants were harvested at dawn before the start of thepulse and at dawn at the end of the pulse and separated into leaf stages for further analysis. Each sample consisted of 20 leavesfrom 20 plants. A, Images of a typical plant at 21, 22, and 23 d after sowing (DAS). The numbers on the leaves correspond to leafnumbers on the x axes in B to D. B, LRGR at each leaf stage during the chase, estimated from sequential images of the rosettefrom three plants. C, Enrichment values of free Ala for each leaf stage at the end of the pulse from a sample of 20 pooled leaves.D, Comparison of the estimated rate of protein synthesis and the rate of protein synthesis that was required for growth. Thecomplete bar (a + b) represents the rate of protein synthesis, estimated from enrichment in Ala in protein corrected for en-richment with free Ala. The gray bar (a) represents the rate of protein synthesis required for growth. This was calculated fromLRGR corrected for the decrease in protein per day in a leaf at that stage. The rate of protein degradation (b) was calculated asthe difference between the rate of protein synthesis and the amount of protein required for growth. The data, including esti-mated changes in leaf protein content with time, are provided in Supplemental Data Set S2. Calculated values for proteinsynthesis and degradation are provided in Supplemental Table S3.Plant Physiol. Vol. 168, 2015 81Protein Synthesis and Degradation in Arabidopsis www.plantphysiol.orgon May 5, 2019 - Published by Downloaded from Copyright © 2015 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.Degradation rate estimated from the chase showed a 17%increase at 28°C compared with 20°C (3.7% and 3.1% d21,respectively). Thus, protein synthesis and protein degra-dation increase by approximately the same extent be-tween 20°C and 28°C.Nucleus-Encoded Large Subunit and Plastid-EncodedSmall Subunit of RubiscoWe were interested to learn if our approach could beadapted to measure the synthesis and degradation ofindividual proteins. For this, we focused on the highlyabundant protein Rubisco (Eckardt et al., 1997). Rubiscoconsists of a nucleus-encoded small subunit (RBCS) anda plastid-encoded large subunit (RBCL). Almost halfof the ribosomes in leaves are located in the plastid(Detchon and Possingham, 1972; Dean and Leech, 1982;Piques et al., 2009). They are involved in the synthesis ofplastid-encoded proteins, including RBCL and compo-nents of complexes in the thylakoid membrane. It is gen-erally thought that plastid protein synthesis is inhibited inthe dark (Marín-Navarro et al., 2007). In agreement, atnight there is a larger decrease in loading of plastid ri-bosomes than cytosolic ribosomes into polysomes (Piqueset al., 2009; Pal et al., 2013).Arabidopsis Col-0 was pulsed with 13CO2 for 24 h,harvested at dusk and dawn, and applied to SDS-PAGE, and the 52- and 18-kD bands were eluted andchemically digested (Allen et al., 2012) for analysiswith GC-TOF-MS (Supplemental Data Set S4). Syn-thesis rates were calculated using enrichment in freeAla, assuming that there is similar enrichment in thecytosol and plastid. In the light, synthesis was fasterfor RBCL (1.2% h21) than for RBCS (0.80% h21), al-though the difference was not statistically signiﬁcant(P = 0.13). Synthesis rates were lower at night butsimilar for RBCL and RBCS (0.37 and 0.36% h21, re-spectively; Table III). The decrease in RBCL synthesisbetween light and dark (3.2-fold) resembled the de-crease in the global rate of protein synthesis (Table I).Thus, RBCL translation is not preferentially inhibitedin the dark.The Starchless phosphoglucomutase MutantIn a last application, we investigated protein synthesisand degradation in the starchless phosphoglucomutase(pgm) mutant. Analysis of transcript and metaboliteproﬁles has revealed that pgm starves at night in shortphotoperiods (Gibon et al., 2004b, 2006; Usadel et al.,2008). We posed two questions. First, how strongly isprotein synthesis inhibited in pgm at night? Analysis ofpolysome loading using density gradient centrifugation(Pal et al., 2013) showed that some polysomes are stillpresent at night in pgm, although fewer than in Col-0.We wanted to distinguish between two explanations forthis observation: that despite extreme C starvation, thereis still a low rate of protein synthesis or that the ribo-somal RNA retrieved in the polysome fraction in pgm atnight is not in active polysomes. Second, based on anincrease in the levels of minor amino acids in the nightin pgm, it has been proposed that protein catabolism isactivated (Gibon et al., 2004b, 2006; Izumi et al., 2013).This should be detectable as a higher rate of proteindegradation. We would also expect a faster decay of theenrichment in free amino acids in the night, due to in-creased recycling of predominantly unlabeled aminoacids from protein.The pgm mutant grows very poorly in short-dayconditions. For this reason, we grew the mutant ini-tially in a 12-h photoperiod before transferring it to an8-h photoperiod, also increasing the duration of thegrowth period to obtain a rosette biomass similar tothat in 21-d-old wild-type Col-0. Wild-type Col-0 andpgmwere then exposed to a 24-h 13CO2 pulse and a 4-dchase, harvesting at dawn before the start of the pulse,at dusk, 4 h into the night, at dawn, and after a 4-dchase (for original data, see Supplemental Data Set S5;for enrichment data, see Supplemental Table S4). Thetime point at 4 h into the night was included becauseTable II. Protein degradation in Arabidopsis grown at 20˚C and 28˚CCol-0 was grown for 21 d in an 8-h photoperiod at either 20˚C or 28˚C, then pulsed with 13CO2 for 24 h,followed by a 4-d chase. Plants were harvested at dawn before the start of the pulse, at dawn at the end ofthe pulse, and at dawn after 1, 2, 3, and 4 d of chase. The data are provided in Supplemental Data Set S3.Three or four samples of five plants were harvested at each time point for 28˚C or 20˚C, respectively. Therate of protein synthesis was estimated from the 13C enrichment in protein in Ala at the end of a 24-h pulseand normalized with the enrichment in free Ala at the end of the pulse. The rate of protein degradation wasestimated by comparing the decrease in enrichment in Ala in protein during the chase with RGR. Thisnormalization will lead to a slight overestimation of the protein synthesis. The RGR at 20˚C is the mean ofthree biological experiments, and that at 28˚C is the mean of three biological replicates. Results are es-timated from the average of four biological replicates from 20˚C-grown plants and the average of threebiological replicates from 28˚C-grown plants.Treatment RGR Protein Synthesis Protein Degradation Half-Lifemg mg21 d21 % d21 d20˚C 0.221 31.7 3.07 3.4928˚C 0.244 37.3 3.70 2.99Ratio 20˚C:28˚C 0.91 0.85 0.8382 Plant Physiol. Vol. 168, 2015Ishihara et al. www.plantphysiol.orgon May 5, 2019 - Published by Downloaded from Copyright © 2015 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.pgm accumulates high levels of sugars in the light anddepletes them during the ﬁrst 3 to 4 h of the night (Gibonet al., 2004b, 2006). C starvation is unlikely to developuntil after this time; indeed, polysome loading decreasesgradually in parallel with the depletion of sugars duringthe ﬁrst hours of the night (Pal et al., 2013).Enrichment in free amino acids increased in a similarmanner in Col-0 and pgm in the light but decayed about2-fold more rapidly in pgm from 4 h onward in the night,pointing to rapid protein degradation in the night (forAla, see Fig. 4; for other amino acids, see SupplementalFig. S6). The only exception was Asn, whose enrichmentincreased at night in pgm (see “Discussion”).The estimated rates of protein synthesis and degra-dation are summarized in Table IV. For Col-0, theabsolute rates and the changes between the light pe-riod and the night resemble those in the experiment ofTable I. For pgm, the rate of protein synthesis in thelight was slightly but not signiﬁcantly lower than thatof Col-0 (1.8% and 2.1% h21, respectively). The rateof protein synthesis decreased in the ﬁrst 4 h of the nightbut was similar to that in Col-0 (0.54% and 0.68% h21,respectively). In the remainder of the night, the rate de-creased further in pgm (0.29% h21) but was maintained inCol-0 (0.7% h21). The rate of protein synthesis over theentire 24-h cycle was 29% lower in pgm (18% d21) than inCol-0 (25.3% d21). Comparison of the average proteinsynthesis rate with RGR revealed a higher average rate ofprotein degradation in pgm than in Col-0 (4.3% comparedwith 3.2% d21, respectively). Analysis of the chase yiel-ded slightly higher degradation rates for both genotypesbut conﬁrmed that degradation was faster in pgm than inwild-type Col-0 (6.1% and 4.8% d21, respectively).In summary, pgm has a 29% lower rate of proteinsynthesis per 24 h than Col-0, due to a lower rate ofprotein synthesis in the second part of the night. The rateof protein degradation over a 24-h cycle is higher, es-pecially when related to the rate of protein synthesis;daily average protein degradation is equivalent to 24%to 34% of daily average protein synthesis in pgm, com-pared with 13% to 19% in Col-0. The lower rate ofsynthesis and higher rate of degradation result in analmost 2-fold decrease in the net gain of protein per day(11.9%–13.7% d21 in pgm compared with 20.5%–22.1%d21 in Col-0). These estimated net rates of protein syn-thesis are very similar to RGR estimated from changesin plant size (0.221 and 0.137 mgmg21 d21, respectively,in Col-0 and pgm).Estimation of Growth by Measuring Enrichment in Glc inthe Cell WallIn a last set of experiments, we investigated whether13CO2 labeling can be used to estimate the rate of cellwall synthesis. We did this for two reasons: ﬁrst, tocompare the rates of cell wall synthesis with those ofprotein synthesis; and second, as an alternative way ofTable III. Synthesis rate of RBCL and RBCS in the light period and the nightCol-0 was grown for 21 d in an 8-h photoperiod and then pulsed with 13CO2 for 24 h. Plants wereharvested at dusk and at dawn at the end of the pulse. Protein was separated by PAGE, and bands cor-responding to RBCL and RBCS were eluted and analyzed. The data are provided in Supplemental Data SetS4. The results are given as means 6 SD (n = 3 biological replicates except for RBCS in the dark, wheren = 2).Protein Synthesis RateRBCL RBCSLight:DarkRatioLight Dark Light Dark RBCL RBCSPer period (%) 9.27 6 1.01 5.84 6 1.05 6.40 6 3.21 5.75 6 2.70 1.59 1.11Per hour (%) 1.16 6 0.13 0.37 6 0.07 0.80 6 0.40 0.36 6 0.17 3.17 2.23Figure 4. Enrichment in free Ala and in Ala residues in protein in wild-type Col-0 and the starchless pgm mutant. The pgm mutant was grownfor 25 d in a 12-h photoperiod and shifted to an 8-h photoperiod 3 dprior to the experiment. Col-0 was grown for 21 d in an 8-h photo-period. Col-0 and pgm were pulsed with 13CO2 for 24 h, followed by a4-d chase. Plants were harvested at five time points: at dawn before thestart of the pulse, at dusk, 4 h into the night, at dawn at the end of thepulse, and at dawn after a 4-d chase (data not shown). The data areprovided in Supplemental Data Set S5, enrichment in free amino acidsand amino acids in protein in Supplemental Table S4, and estimatedrates of protein synthesis and protein degradation in Table IV. Theexperiment was repeated three times, taking one sample of five plantsat each time point in each experiment. The plot shows average (m) ofthree biological replicates with SD (m 6 SD). The absence of error barsmeans that they were smaller than the symbols. The increase in en-richment in amino acids in protein in pgm between 4 and 16 h into thenight was significant (P = 0.016). AA, Amino acid.Plant Physiol. Vol. 168, 2015 83Protein Synthesis and Degradation in Arabidopsis www.plantphysiol.orgon May 5, 2019 - Published by Downloaded from Copyright © 2015 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.estimating RGR. Up to 55% of Arabidopsis rosette dryweight is cell wall (Williams et al., 2010), of which about20% to 30% is cellulose, with further contributions fromhemicellulose, pectin, and proteins (Somerville et al., 2004;Lodish et al., 2011; Somerville et al., 2004). Celluloseand the backbone of hemicellulose consist of b(1-4)-linked D-Glc. Assuming that there is little or no deg-radation of these polysaccharides, enrichment in Glcin the cell wall should be a reasonable proxy for therate of growth.Using material from the experiment of Table IV, cellwalls were isolated, thoroughly digested to removestarch, chemically hydrolyzed, and analyzed by GC-TOF-MS to determine the kinetics of enrichment in Glcin the cell wall (Tables V and VI). In this case, we did notapply a correction for incomplete labeling of precursor.Hexose phosphates and UDP-Glc show quite complexlabeling kinetics due to the presence of compartmentedpools (Szecowka et al., 2013). Suc-6-P, which liesdownstream of these metabolites, is rapidly labeled tomore than 70% enrichment, giving a minimum value forenrichment in the hexose phosphate and UDP-Glc pre-cursor pools (Szecowka et al., 2013).In the light period, the rate of label incorporationinto Glc in the cell wall is about 50% faster in Col-0than in pgm (1.52% and 1.01% h21, respectively).During the ﬁrst 4 h of darkness, growth decreased inCol-0 but remained high in pgm (0.45% and 1.3% h21,respectively). It should be noted that there were rela-tively small changes in enrichment in this short timeinterval, so the estimated rates are less reliable than forother time intervals. In the remainder of the night, Glcincorporation continued at the same rate in Col-0 butstopped in pgm (0.44% and 0.02% h21, respectively). Inwild-type Col-0, the decrease in the rate of cell wallsynthesis in the night compared with the light period(about 3-fold) is similar to the decrease in the rate ofprotein synthesis. In contrast, in pgm, cell wall syn-thesis is almost completely inhibited in the last part ofthe night, whereas (see above) protein synthesis con-tinues at a low rate.We used the labeling kinetics of Glc in the cell wallto estimate the relative rate of accumulation of struc-tural dry matter (RGRSTR), assuming that there is nodegradation of Glc in cell wall polysaccharides (TablesV and VI; Supplemental Data Set S5). Summing therates of Glc incorporation estimated from the pulsedata gave estimates of RGRSTR of 0.192 and 0.135 inCol-0 and pgm, respectively (Tables V and VI). Thelabeling kinetics in the chase allowed an independentestimate of RGRSTR as:RGRSTR ¼ tﬃﬃﬃxyr2 1where x and y are enrichment in Glc in cell wall at theend of the pulse and the end of the chase, respectively,and t is the duration of the chase in days. This ap-proach gave estimates of RGRSTR of 0.205 in Col-0and 0.127 in pgm (Tables V and VI). Both approachesyield estimates of RGRSTR that are slightly lower thanRGR obtained by an analysis of plant size (0.221 and0.137 mg mg21 d21 in Col-0 and pgm, respectively).The slightly lower RGRSTR obtained by an analysis ofenrichment in cell wall Glc compared with RGR esti-mated from changes in plant size might be due toenrichment in metabolites in central metabolismsaturating at about 90% (Szecowka et al., 2013). De-spite this slight discrepancy, RGRSTR and RGR showedsimilar decreases (both about 38%) in pgm comparedwith Col-0.DISCUSSIONA Simple Protocol to Measure the Global Rate of ProteinSynthesis and Degradation in Whole Plants Growing in aLight/Dark CycleWe have established a simple method to quantifythe global rate of protein synthesis and protein deg-radation. By providing 13CO2 in the atmosphere in theTable IV. Comparison of the rates of protein synthesis and degradation in Col-0 and the starchless pgm mutantCol-0 was grown for 21 d in an 8-h photoperiod. pgm was sown out 7 d earlier than Col-0 and initially grown in a 12-h photoperiod to allow theacquisition of biomass, before transfer to an 8-h photoperiod 3 d before the start of the pulse. Both genotypes were pulsed with 13CO2 for 24 h,followed by a 4-d chase. Plants were harvested at dawn before the start of the pulse, at dusk, 4 h into the night, at dawn at the end of the pulse, and atdawn after a 4-d chase. The experiment was repeated three times with separately grown batches of plants; in each experiment, one sample of fiveplants was harvested at each time point. Rates of synthesis were estimated for two time intervals in the night: between dusk and 4 h of darkness (T8–T12) and between 4 h of darkness and the end of the night (T12–T24). The data are provided in Supplemental Data Set S5, calculated enrichments inSupplemental Table S4, and plots of changes in the enrichment of selected amino acids in Figure 4. The rate of protein synthesis was calculated bycorrecting enrichment in Ala in protein by the enrichment in free Ala at dusk. Results are estimated from the average of three biological replicates.Plant RGRProtein SynthesisProteinDegradationHalf-LifeAverage per24-h CycleLight (T0–T8)per HourDark (T8–T12)per HourDark (T12–T24)per HourPulse Chase Pulse Chasemg mg21 d21 % total protein d21 dCol-0 0.221 25.29 2.11 0.68 0.7 3.18 4.84 3.38 2.48pgm 0.137 18.02 1.81 0.54 0.29 4.33 6.09 2.67 2.17Ratio pgm:Col-0 0.62 0.71 0.86 0.8 0.42 1.36 1.2684 Plant Physiol. Vol. 168, 2015Ishihara et al. www.plantphysiol.orgon May 5, 2019 - Published by Downloaded from Copyright © 2015 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.light, we rapidly introduce label in the pulse and removeit during a chase without perturbing metabolism andgrowth. Labeled C that accumulates in the light periodin transitory C reserves like starch provides an internalsource of label during the night.A key feature is our use of parallel information aboutenrichment in free amino acids and enrichment in aminoacid residues in protein to calculate the absolute rate ofprotein synthesis. In principle, data for each amino acidcould be used separately to provide many parallel esti-mates of the rate of protein synthesis. However, mostamino acids show complex labeling kinetics, with a slowand incomplete increase in enrichment in the light, apartial decrease in enrichment at night during the pulse,and a slow decline in enrichment during the chase (Fig.1). While the reasons probably vary from case to case,some general features can be distinguished.The most rapidly and completely labeled amino acidswere Ala, Asp, Gly, and Ser. Ala and Asp are formed viareversible reactions from metabolites in central metab-olism, and Gly and Ser are intermediates in the photo-respiration pathway.Most other amino acids are synthesized via longdedicated pathways, which may contribute to their slowlabeling kinetics. The aromatic amino acids showedquite rapid labeling kinetics. This may be explained bytwo factors: ﬁrst, the immediate precursors for the shi-kimate pathway are the Calvin-Benson cycle interme-diate erythrose 4-phosphate and pyruvate, and bothshow rapid increases in enrichment during a pulse(Szecowka et al., 2013); and, second, ﬂux through theshikimate pathway will be higher than in other aminoacid biosynthesis pathways, because the shikimatepathway also provides precursors for phenylpropanoidmetabolism. Their labeling was nevertheless slower thanfor Ala, Asp, Gly, and Ser.Labeling kinetics are also complicated by the presenceof multiple pools with different labeling kinetics. Manyamino acids are located in both the cytoplasm and thevacuole (Riens et al., 1991; Weiner and Heldt, 1992;Winter et al., 1992; Krueger et al., 2011; Arrivault et al.,2014), and it is likely that the cytoplasmic pool is morerapidly labeled than the vacuolar pool (Szecowka et al.,2013). There may also be pools in nonphotosynthetic cellsthat are not rapidly labeled with 13CO2. As a consequence,for many amino acids, the average enrichment may un-derestimate the enrichment in the precursor pool forprotein synthesis.Compartmentation may also contribute to the gen-eral decrease in average enrichment of free aminoacids at night. Amino acid levels increase in the lightand decrease at night, when they are used for proteinsynthesis (Gibon et al., 2009; Piques et al., 2009; Palet al., 2013). The pools that are formed from newlyﬁxed 13CO2 in light are probably preferentially utilizedat night, resulting in an increase in the contribution ofunlabeled or weakly labeled pools at dawn. This isprobably the reason for the large decrease in the en-richment of Gly at dawn. Gly undergoes especiallylarge diurnal changes, due to its accumulation duringphotorespiration. The pool that is involved in photo-respiration will be highly enriched (Szecowka et al.,2013). The large decrease in enrichment at dawn wouldbe explained if there is another small and weakly labeledpool of Gly, which is compartmented from the pool thatis involved in photorespiration. This weakly labeled poolwould make little contribution to total Gly at dusk but alarge contribution at dawn.Incomplete labeling of free amino acid pools couldalso result from protein degradation, which will recy-cle unlabeled amino acids. However, turnover is gen-erally quite low, so this is probably only a major factorin special cases, such as the pgm mutant at night.In some cases, the slow labeling kinetic reﬂectsspeciﬁc features of metabolic pathways. One exampleis the unexpectedly slow labeling of Glu and Gln in thelight (Fig. 1). This resembles an earlier observation thatenrichment in Glu remains high during the ﬁrst lightTable V. Rate of cell wall synthesis in Col-0 and the starchless pgm mutantChanges in enrichment in Glc in the cell wall fraction in different time intervals during a day-night cycleand during the entire 24-h 13CO2 pulse are shown. The data are for the same experiment as that of Table IV.The original data are provided in Supplemental Data Set S5.TimeIncrease inEnrichment perIntervalIncrease inEnrichment perHour Ratio Col-0:pgmCol-0 pgm Col-0 pgm%T0 to T8 (light) 12.15 8.06 1.52 1.01 1.51T8 to T12 (start of night) 1.79 5.12 0.45 1.28 0.35T12 to T24 (later in night) 5.29 0.29 0.44 0.02 18.54T0 to T24 19.23 13.47Table VI. RGR and RGRSTR in Col-0 and the starchless pgm mutantComparison of RGRSTR calculated from 13C enrichment in the chaseand RGR calculated from fresh weight and rosette area is shown. Thedata are for the same experiment as that of Table IV. The original dataare provided in Supplemental Data Set S5.Plant RGRSTR RGRSTR d21 mg mg21 d21Col-0 0.205 0.221pgm 0.127 0.137Plant Physiol. Vol. 168, 2015 85Protein Synthesis and Degradation in Arabidopsis www.plantphysiol.orgon May 5, 2019 - Published by Downloaded from Copyright © 2015 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.period of a chase when Arabidopsis plants are labeledfor several days with 13CO2 and then chased with CO2(Huege et al., 2007). It has been known for some timethat citrate levels fall in the light and recover at night(Scheible et al., 2000; Urbanczyk-Wochniak et al.,2005). It was recently reported that 2-oxoglutarate islabeled only slowly in the light (Szecowka et al., 2013)and that most of the Glu formed in the light derivesfrom a preexisting and thus unlabeled pool of citrate(Tcherkez et al., 2012a, 2012b). Our data conﬁrm thatthere is strong restriction on the ﬂux of newly ﬁxed 13Cto citrate, Glu, and Gln in the light and show that thisrestriction is relieved at night (Supplemental Fig. S1).This is presumably due either to inhibition in the lightof pyruvate dehydrogenase activity (Tovar-Méndezet al., 2003) or of succinate dehydrogenase and fuma-rase by the mitochondrial thioredoxin system (Dalosoet al., 2015).Comparison of the labeling kinetics after supplying13CO2 to soil-grown plants and after supplying2H2Oto seedlings (Yang et al., 2010) reveals a qualitativelysimilar response for most amino acids. In both studies,Ala, Asp, Ser, and Gly labeled rapidly and reachedhigh enrichment, while most minor amino acids la-beled slowly and incompletely or showed biphasickinetics, pointing to the presence of multiple pools. Alaand Asp labeled from 2H2O with half-times on theorder of 0.5 to 0.7 h. In our study, half-times cannot beestimated, because the ﬁrst sampling time point was at4 h. However, by this time, maximum enrichment hadbeen reached, indicating that the rate of labeling is notmuch slower than with 2H2O. This conclusion is sup-ported by the rapid labeling of Ala reported by Szecowkaet al. (2013). However, there were some differencesbetween the labeling kinetics in our study and that ofYang et al. (2010). First, Ala and Asp labeled evenmore completely from 2H2O in seedlings than from13CO2 in soil-grown plants. Second, relative to otheramino acids, Gly and Ser labeled more slowly from2H2O in seedlings (compared with Ala and Asp, thehalf-times of Gly and Ser were about 5 and 3 timesslower, respectively) than from 13CO2 (labeling wasnot noticeably slower than for Ala and Asp; Szecowkaet al., 2013). Third, Glu labeled much more rapidlyfrom 2H2O in seedlings than from13CO2 in soil-grownplants. These differences may be due in part to dif-ferent pool sizes and compartmentation in seedlingsand older plants. They may also reﬂect a lower con-tribution of photosynthesis in the seedling system. Asigniﬁcant part of the seedling is nonphotosynthetictissue, and their leaves were submerged, which islikely to reduce CO2 access and the rate of photosyn-thesis. This might explain why, despite the 2H2O la-beling of seedlings being performed in the light,labeling of Gly and Ser was relatively slow and la-beling of Glu was much faster than in our experi-ments. It is also noteworthy that Yang et al. (2010)showed that the labeling kinetics of Ala and Asp aremore than 50-fold slower from 15NO3 than from2H2O. Overall, the study of Yang et al. (2010) and ourstudy show that most individual amino acids havecomplex and incomplete labeling patterns and under-line the importance of taking this into account in anystudy of the rate of protein synthesis.The reason for the complex labeling pattern of freeamino acids will affect how this information should beused to calculate the rate of protein synthesis. For ex-ample, if low enrichment is due to the presence ofmultiple pools, use of the average value will result inoverestimation of the rate of protein synthesis, becauseaverage enrichment will underestimate enrichment inthe precursor pool. For this reason, we decided to useAla, which showed the most rapid and complete la-beling kinetics. The rate of protein synthesis will beslightly overestimated if the incomplete labeling of Alais due to a separate unlabeled pool that is not involvedin protein synthesis. However, analysis of the iso-topomer labeling kinetics did not reveal any evidencefor a small unlabeled pool of Ala. Any error intro-duced by the correction will be small anyway, becausethe overall enrichment in free Ala is high (typically,80% in the light and 70% in the dark). Furthermore,our published analyses indicate that enrichment ofCalvin-Benson cycle intermediates does not rise above90%, presumably due to continual recycling of unla-beled C (Szecowka et al., 2013). In tissues or treatmentswhere no amino acid shows a suitable enrichmentpattern, it will be necessary to analyze the reasons forthe incomplete enrichment in more detail to decidehow to apply the correction.Other small errors can arise in our simple protocol.One is that we did not measure the precise rate atwhich 13C enrichment increased in Ala at the start ofthe pulse. Data from Szecowka et al. (2013) indicatethat this occurs within 1 h even when labeling com-mences in the middle of the light period in the pres-ence of a large unlabeled pool of Ala. Therefore, it ispossible that our protocol results in a small but sys-tematic underestimation of the rate of protein synthe-sis in the light. Another potential source of error is thatsome protein synthesis may occur in cell types that arenot being labeled in the time frame of the 13CO2pulse. The observation that Ala showed similar en-richment in very young leaves and in mature leaves(Fig. 2C) argues against this being a general problem,but we cannot exclude the possibility that some speciﬁccell types are missing from our analysis. Our calcula-tion will also underestimate the rate of protein syn-thesis in conditions where rapid protein degradationrecycles substantial amounts of label out of protein;however, in our experiments, this error is negligible,because the protein pool was only labeled up to about25% and the rate of protein degradation was low inalmost all investigated conditions.It was necessary to perform pulse and chase exper-iments for a fairly long time, due to the relatively lowrate of protein synthesis. Long pulses are also neededto analyze protein synthesis throughout the light/darkcycle. During this time, metabolism is moving througha series of quasisteady states. Our approach, which86 Plant Physiol. Vol. 168, 2015Ishihara et al. www.plantphysiol.orgon May 5, 2019 - Published by Downloaded from Copyright © 2015 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.involves comparison of a single precursor pool and asingle product, can be applied to nonsteady-state con-ditions. While there are more sophisticated computa-tional methods that analyze dynamic labeling patternsin large metabolic networks, they can only be appliedwhen the metabolism is in steady state (Antoniewiczet al., 2006; Yuan et al., 2006, 2008; Young et al., 2011)and, in higher plants, also require assumptions about thespatial compartmentation (Szecowka et al., 2013; Heiseet al., 2014; Ma et al., 2014). Although recent theoreticaldevelopments allow the analysis of dynamic labeling inmetabolic nonsteady state in microbes (Antoniewicz,2013), it remains challenging to apply these methods inhigher plants.While small errors will not greatly affect estimates ofprotein synthesis rates, they will affect the estimates ofprotein degradation rates. The latter are estimated fromthe difference between the rate of protein synthesis andthe rate of growth. The rate of protein synthesis is oftenonly slightly higher than the rate of growth, making ourestimates of the rate of protein degradation sensitive toexperimental and computational error.Measurement of Plant Growth RateEstimation of the rate of protein degradation re-quires information about the growth rate. RGR wasestimated by destructive harvesting of batches ofplants during the pulse and chase. These values wereconﬁrmed by repeating these measurements in bio-logically replicated experiments with separately grownbatches of plants in the same growth conditions(Supplemental Fig. S5C) and by time-series imaging ofthe leaf area of individual plants during the labelingexperiments.However, changes in plant size may not always re-ﬂect changes in biomass, deﬁned as structural drymass. They will differ, for example, when vacuole ex-pansion is leading to a change in plant size that is nottightly coupled to changes in structural biomass.Therefore, we explored whether the 13CO2 labelingcould be used to monitor the enrichment of Glc in cellwall material and, hence, the rate of cell wall synthesis(Tables V and VI; Supplemental Data S5). This ap-proach gave estimates of growth rate that agreed wellwith those obtained by measurements of plant size. Itshould be noted that this conclusion holds for an entire24-h cycle but does not exclude the possibility thatthere may be temporal uncoupling of cell wall syn-thesis and increases in plant size at some times duringthe 24-h cycle (see below). A related problem will ariseif expansion growth or other factors lead to a change inprotein content during the experiment. In such cases, itis important to measure protein content and integratethis information into the calculation of protein degra-dation, as illustrated by the inclusion of informationabout changes in protein content in our analysis of theﬂux to growth and the rate of protein degradation inyoung leaves (Fig. 3)Rates of Protein Synthesis and Degradation during aDiurnal CycleOur analysis reveals, for Arabidopsis Col-0 growingin short photoperiods, that the rate of protein synthesisin the light is about 3-fold higher than in the dark. Thisis a much larger decrease than for polysome loading,which only decreases by 25% to 30% (Pal et al., 2013;Sulpice et al., 2014). This comparison emphasizes thatpolysome loading only provides a qualitative proxyfor the rate of protein synthesis. Several factors maylead to polysome loading underestimating the actualchanges in the rate of protein synthesis, includingchanges in the rate of progression of ribosomes, ribo-some stalling, or the presence of RNA in other high-mass structures.As the plants were growing in an 8-h photoperiod,the amount of protein synthesized at night was about40% of the total protein synthesis in a 24-h cycle. Cellwall synthesis also continues in the night at about one-third of the rate in the light, which is equivalent toabout 40% of the cell wall synthesis occurring at night.These results underline the importance of nocturnalmetabolism for growth. In an 8-h photoperiod, Col-0accumulates about 52% of the daily ﬁxed C as starchand other metabolites to support respiration and growthat night (Sulpice et al., 2014), of which about 10% is re-spired, leaving about 40% for the synthesis of structuralbiomass.The rate of growth was about 22% d21 in Col-0 in ourgrowth conditions. Most of the synthesized protein,therefore, represents ﬂux to growth. The estimated rateof protein degradation was 3.1% to 3.5% d21, which ismuch lower than the ﬂux to growth. A combination ofdilution by growth and protein degradation results in aglobal protein half-life of 3.1 to 3.5 d. This is similar tothat predicted for Arabidopsis rosettes using ribosomeabundance and polysome loading to model the globalrate of protein synthesis (Piques et al., 2009). Thus, ourresults validate this simple linear model, which usedliterature values for the rate of ribosome progression tolink quantitative molecular data to whole-plant growth.Our estimates also lie in a similar range to those obtainedin experimental studies of small sets of mitochondrialproteins in Arabidopsis cell cultures (Nelson et al., 2013)and Arabidopsis rosettes (Li et al., 2012) and a set of 508proteins in barley leaves (Nelson et al., 2014b).Inappropriate Regulation of C Allocation Has MajorConsequences for Protein Synthesis and DegradationStarch turnover buffers plants against the daily alter-nation of light and dark (Smith and Stitt, 2007; Stitt andZeeman, 2012). We used the starchless pgm mutant toinvestigate the importance of starch for the rate andtiming of protein synthesis and degradation. Proteinsynthesis in pgm occurred at a similar rate to wild-typeplants in the light but was strongly inhibited in the dark.Nonetheless, even though pgm is severely C starved atnight (Gibon et al., 2004b, 2006), some protein synthesisPlant Physiol. Vol. 168, 2015 87Protein Synthesis and Degradation in Arabidopsis www.plantphysiol.orgon May 5, 2019 - Published by Downloaded from Copyright © 2015 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.continued; the rate of protein synthesis in pgm in the last12 h of the night was 40% of that in Col-0 in the nightand 14% of that in Col-0 and pgm in the light. C star-vation leads to strong changes in transcription, includ-ing the induction of many genes (Price et al., 2004;Bläsing et al., 2005; Usadel et al., 2008). Some of the re-sidual protein synthesis in the night in pgm might berelated to the synthesis of proteins that are required forC starvation responses. In agreement, C starvation-related enzymes like Glu dehydrogenase show an in-crease in abundance in pgm (Gibon et al., 2004a). Thecomposition of ribosomes changes in response toC starvation (Hummel et al., 2012), although it is not yetknown if this occurs rapidly enough to contribute totranslational responses during the night in the pgmmutant.The inhibition of cell wall synthesis at night in pgmwas stronger than the inhibition of protein synthesis.This is consistent with the idea that the residual pro-tein synthesis may be related to adjustment to low C,rather than growth. The partial inhibition of cell wallsynthesis in the night in wild-type Col-0 and thecomplete inhibition in pgm underlines that the syn-thesis of cellulose, and probably other cell wall com-ponents, is tightly regulated by C.Whereas amino acid levels decline during the nightin wild-type Arabidopsis (Gibon et al., 2009; Pal et al.,2013; Sulpice et al., 2014), they increase in the pgmmutant (Gibon et al., 2006; Izumi et al., 2013), indi-cating that protein degradation is increased to provideamino acids as an alternative substrate for respiration.Our measurements provide direct evidence that pro-tein degradation is increased at night in the pgm mu-tant. First, calculated rates of protein degradation arealmost 2-fold higher in pgm than in wild-type plants.Second, there is a dramatic decrease in enrichment inalmost all free amino acids at night in pgm, as expectedif increased protein degradation is leading to rapidrecycling of unlabeled amino acids. The only exceptionwas Asn. C starvation leads to a strong increase inASN1 transcript abundance (Lam et al., 1996, 1998;Bläsing et al., 2005; Usadel et al., 2008). The level ofAsn typically increases strongly in C-starved plants,providing a store for amino acid residues that arerecycled from respired amino acids (Brouquisse et al.,1991; Lam et al., 1996; Gibon et al., 2006). The increasein Asn enrichment during the night in pgm, at a timewhen enrichment in all other amino acids is falling,provides evidence for the synthesis of Asn fromprelabeled C pools, which may include Asp and organicacids like malate and fumarate.The pgm mutant has an approximately 40% smallerdaily net increment in protein than wild-type Col-0(11.9%–13.7% d21 in pgm compared with 20.5%–22.1%d21 in Col-0). This closely matches the observed de-crease in growth (38%) estimated either from sizemeasurements or from Glc incorporation into the cellwall. This decrease in net protein synthesis is the resultof a 29% reduction in the amount of protein synthe-sized per 24-h cycle, due to the lower rate of proteinsynthesis in the night, and a 26% to 35% increase in therate of protein degradation (Table III). The decrease ingrowth-related protein synthesis may be even larger,because some of the protein synthesis at night in pgmmay serve to produce proteins that are involved inC starvation responses (see above). Furthermore, thisdaily alternation between net protein synthesis anddegradation results in a time offset and wasteful futilecycle in pgm, in which energy is used to synthesizeproteins in the light period that are degraded in thedark. The low rate of protein synthesis during thenight and the daily cycle of protein synthesis anddegradation will also result in less efﬁcient use of thetranslational apparatus in pgm than in wild-type Col-0.Many explanations have been advanced for the poorgrowth of pgm in short photoperiods, ranging fromloss of C due to rapid respiration as sugars declinefrom high to low levels at the start of the night (Casparet al., 1985) to disturbances in root metabolism (Brauneret al., 2014). However, they do not provide a quantita-tive explanation for the growth inhibition; indeed, theincrease in respiration accounts for only a small pro-portion of the assimilated C. Furthermore, some of theseeffects may be secondary; for example, the high rate ofrespiration in the ﬁrst part of the night can be at leastpartly explained as a consequence of the continuation ofprotein and cell wall synthesis at this time in the pgmmutant, rather than as wasteful stimulation of respira-tion by high sugar.Changes in Temperature Do Not Have a Major Impact onProtein DegradationHigh temperature results in an increase in respira-tion, in particular maintenance respiration, (Penningde Vries et al., 1979; Amthor, 2000). In Arabidopsis,maintenance respiration doubles between growthtemperatures of 16°C and 24°C (Pyl et al., 2012). Themajor maintenance costs are thought to be proteinturnover and the maintenance of gradients acrossmembranes (Penning de Vries, 1975; Amthor, 2000).Our results show that increasing the growth temper-ature from 20°C to 28°C leads to a parallel 30% in-crease in both the rate of protein synthesis and the rateof protein degradation. This indicates that, althoughan increase in protein turnover could contribute to therise in maintenance respiration at high temperature, itis unlikely to be the only factor. Two other recentstudies also indicate that protein turnover is not themain factor underlying the increase in maintenancerespiration at high temperature. Pilkington et al. (2015)estimated that the ATP provided by maintenance res-piration in Arabidopsis growing in a short photope-riod would support the synthesis and degradation of4% of the total protein per h, which is 10-fold higherthan the measured rate of protein degradation.Cheung et al. (2013) used metabolic ﬂux balanceanalysis to estimate the rate of consumption of ATPand NADPH during maintenance in Arabidopsis cell88 Plant Physiol. Vol. 168, 2015Ishihara et al. www.plantphysiol.orgon May 5, 2019 - Published by Downloaded from Copyright © 2015 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.cultures and concluded that up to one-third of theoutput of maintenance respiration was NADPH, whichis presumably used for processes other than proteinsynthesis.Darkness Does Not Lead to a Preferential Inhibition of allProtein Synthesis in the PlastidAlthough our protocol was designed to analyzeglobal protein synthesis, we were interested to learn if itcould be modiﬁed to investigate individual proteins.Using a procedure adapted from Allen et al. (2012), wefound that synthesis of the plastid-encoded RBCL con-tinues in the dark, being inhibited to approximately thesame extent as the synthesis of the nucleus-encodedRBCS and the overall rate of protein synthesis. Thiswas initially surprising, as it is thought that plastidtranslation is inhibited in the dark (Marín-Navarro et al.,2007). This idea is based on studies of protein synthesisin isolated chloroplasts and on studies of plastid-encoded proteins that are targeted to the thylakoids.However, isolated chloroplasts may not be a perfectmodel for studying plastid protein synthesis in wholeleaves. It is also possible that the synthesis of a solubleprotein like RBCL may be differently regulated fromproteins that are assembled into protein complexes inthe thylakoid membrane and whose targeting andassembly may be light dependent (Keegstra and Cline,1999; Cline and Dabney-Smith, 2008). Furthermore, asRubisco represents up to 40% of total leaf protein(Eckardt et al., 1997), restricting its synthesis to thelight period would severely restrict the availability ofribosomes for the synthesis of other protein species.The question arises of whether our approach can beadapted to analyze the synthesis and degradation ofless abundant proteins. One possibility might be tocombine it with the approach used by Yang et al.(2010), who overexpressed tagged variants of selectedproteins to aid their puriﬁcation. This approach willprobably be limited by the sensitivity of the detectionof amino acids in gas chromatography-mass spec-trometry. Alternatively, 13C-labeled protein might beconverted to peptides for analysis, as was done byYang et al. (2010). In this case, the major challengeswill be deconvolution of the complex envelope andcorrection of the enrichment for all amino acids in thepeptide, including many with very incomplete en-richment in the precursor free amino acid pool. Thesechallenges are shared by strategies using 2H2O la-beling. While the peptide envelope is simpler when15N is used as a label (Li et al., 2012; Nelson et al.,2014a, 2014b), the slow labeling kinetic of amino acidsin higher plants (Yang et al., 2010) means that thisapproach is probably unsuited for rapidly turning overproteins. The decision between labeling with 13CO2and 2H2O may depend on the tissue and conditionunder investigation, as this will affect which isotopecan be introduced with the least disturbance, theextent to which inhibitory effects of 2H2O can beminimized, and the speed and completeness of thelabeling kinetics of free amino acid pools.In conclusion, we have developed a relatively simplemethod that introduces label via photosynthetic CO2ﬁxation and provides quantitative information on theglobal rate of protein synthesis and degradation. Thekey feature is parallel determination of isotope enrich-ment in the products and in the metabolite precursorsfrom which they are synthesized. We have applied thisapproach to investigate the relationship between proteinmetabolism, the plant energy budget and growth, andthe impact of development and environmental pertur-bations on protein synthesis and degradation. While itcan also be used to study individual proteins, this ap-plication will probably be restricted to abundant pro-teins. We have shown that the approach can beextended to provide quantitative information about therate of cell wall synthesis and expect that it will also beapplicable to other classes of structural components aswell as specialized metabolites. This would allow acomprehensive analysis of the rates of synthesis of allmajor structural components in the plant as well asmajor defense metabolites. An equally important chal-lenge will be to adapt this approach to introduce 13CO2via photosynthesis, allow label to move through theplant via endogenous transport routes, and analyzeﬂuxes to growth in nonphotosynthetic organs such asroots and seeds.MATERIALS AND METHODSPlant Growth ConditionsArabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) Col-0 seeds were germinated and grown in soilfor 1 week with 16 h of light (20°C in the light and 6°C at night, 150 mmol m22 s21ﬂuorescent light, and 60%–70% relative humidity) before transfer to short days(8 h of light, 150 mmol m22 s21, 20°C/19°C in the light and dark, and 60%–70%relative humidity). Fourteen days after sowing, ﬁve seedlings were prickedinto 10-cm pots and grown under the same conditions in a controlled-environmentchamber (model E-36L; Percival Scientiﬁc; Thimm et al., 2004). In some experi-ments, Col-0 plants were transferred to short days with 28°C/28°C in the light anddark (8 h of light, 150 mmol m22 s21, and 60%–70% relative humidity) at 18 d aftersowing and used for the labeling experiment at 21 d after sowing. The pgmmutantwas germinated as above and grown in a 12-h photoperiod (20°C/19°C in the lightand dark, 150 mmol m22 s21 ﬂuorescent light, and 60%–70% relative humidity)until 25 d after sowing and then shifted to an 8-h photoperiod 3 d prior to theexperiment at 28 d after sowing.13CO2 Feeding Experiments13CO2 feeding was carried in a Plexiglas box (internal dimensions, 603 313 17.4cm, holding up to 17 10-cm pots, each containing ﬁve plants) in a Percivalcontrolled-environment chamber. Three-week-old plants were transferred tothe chamber 3 d before the experiment. The labeling chamber was suppliedwith a premixed air stream containing 450 mL L21 CO2 or13CO2, 21% (v/v)oxygen, and 79% (v/v) nitrogen. At a ﬂow rate of 5 L min21, the air in thechamber was completely replaced in 20 min. During 13CO2 feeding, the airexiting the box was passed through a gas-wash bottle ﬁlled with soda limepellets with indicator (Merck Millipore) to prevent the release of 13CO2 into thegrowth chamber. Unless speciﬁed, 13CO2 feeding was performed in growthconditions with photon ﬂux density and temperature inside the box of ap-proximately 150 mmol m22 s21 and 20°C/18°C in light and dark, respectively.Labeling started 1 h before dawn and was continued through an entire lightand dark period. Plants were harvested by opening the lid of the labelingchamber, removing the plants and submerging them in liquid N2, andPlant Physiol. Vol. 168, 2015 89Protein Synthesis and Degradation in Arabidopsis www.plantphysiol.orgon May 5, 2019 - Published by Downloaded from Copyright © 2015 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.reclosing the lid within 10 s. Immediately following harvest, leaf tissues werefrozen in liquid nitrogen. Samples were ground to a ﬁne powder at 270°Cusing a cryogenic grinding robot (http://www.labman.co.uk/portfolio-type/cryogenic-plant-grinder-and-dispensing-system/; Labman Automation) andstored until analysis at 280°C.Metabolite and Protein AnalysisHomogenized frozen plant material (30 mg) was extracted with methanolfollowed by phase separation using chloroform-water as described by Heise et al.(2014). Ice-cold 100% (v/v) methanol and ribitol (1.31 mM) solution as an internalquantitative standard were added to the homogenized plant material and incu-bated for 10 min at 70°C. After the incubation, the samples were centrifuged. Thepellet was kept for protein and cell wall analysis. The supernatant was used forphase separation using chloroform-water. The apolar (chloroform) phase wasdiscarded. The upper polar phase was used for methoxysilylation of metaboliteswith N-methyl-N-trimethylsilyltriﬂuoroacetamide followed by GC-TOF-MSanalysis using the same conditions and settings as described by Lisec et al. (2006).Total protein was extracted from the pellet using 6 M urea/2 M thiourea solution.Total protein was measured as described by Bradford (1976). Protein (about50 mg) was precipitated with 15% (v/v) ice-cold TCA and washed with ice-cold100% (v/v) acetone. The pellet was chemically hydrolyzed with 6 M hydrochloricacid at 100°C for 24 h at atmospheric pressure (Williams et al., 2010). Thehydrolysate was dried and derivatized with N-methyl-N-trimethylsilyltri-ﬂuoroacetamide for GC-TOF-MS. The resulting chromatograms were processedas described by Heise et al. (2014). Brieﬂy, chromatography peaks were manu-ally assigned to parent metabolites, and ion intensity was determined usingTagFinder (Luedemann et al., 2008) based on mass spectra and retention indicesin a reference library derived from the Golm Metabolome Database (http://gmd.mpimp-golm.mpg.de; Kopka et al., 2005). Using the CORRECTOR soft-ware tool (Heuge et al., 2014), mass fragment intensities were adjusted to correctfor the presence of naturally occurring stable isotopes. Fragmental isotope en-richment was calculated according to Equation 1:enrichment ð%Þ ¼ ∑in¼0ðn 3mnÞn3∑in¼0mn3 100 ð1Þwhere n represents the number of 13C atoms in the detected fragment, and mnis the corrected intensity of a mass fragment that contains n 13C atoms. Inaddition, relative isotope abundance (RIA) for each metabolite was calculatedby following Equation 2:RIA ð%Þ ¼ mn∑in¼0mn3 100 ð2ÞSignal intensity was high enough to quantify the 13C enrichment in Glu, Asp,Ala, Ser, Gly, Ile, Val, Lys, Phe, Tyr, and Pro, but other amino acids could notbe analyzed due to low abundance.Cell Wall AnalysisThe pellet remaining after protein extraction was used for cell wall analysis asdescribed by Saeman et al. (1945) with modiﬁcations. After removing the urea/thiourea solution from the pellet by washing ﬁve times with distilled water, thepellet was resuspended in 0.3 mL of 0.1 M acetate/NaOH (pH 4.9). Starch in thepellet was removed in two sequential 16-h digestions with 0.2 mL of starchdegradation mix (16.8 units mL21 amyloglucosidase and 30 units mL21a-amylase) at 37°C. The remaining pellet was thoroughly washed three times bymixing it with 0.5 mL of distilled water. The sample was then incubated in 72%(v/v) sulfuric acid in 2-mL screw-cap microcentrifuge tubes at room tempera-ture for 1 h, water was added to the sample to adjust sulfuric acid to 1 M, andincubation was continued for 3 h at 100°C to hydrolyze polysaccharides in-cluding cellulose. The hydolysate was neutralized with 1 mL of 20% (v/v) N,N-dioctylamine, and excess N,N-dioctylamine was then removed from the aqueousphase by washing three times with 1 mL of 100% (v/v) chloroform. The hy-drolysate was dried and stored at280°C until subsequent derivatization for GC-TOF-MS analysis to quantify 13C enrichment in Glc.Determination of Enrichment in RBCL and RBCSRBCL and RBCS were isolated from total protein and analyzed for 13Cenrichment as described by Allen et al. (2012) with modiﬁcations. Protein wasseparated on 15% (v/v) SDS-PAGE Tris-HCl gels (PowerPac UniversalSupply; Bio-Rad). The gel was electroblotted to a Bio-Rad immunoblot poly-vinylidene diﬂuoride membrane and stained with Ponceaus S solution (Sigma-Aldrich). Using Mr markers, RBCL and RBCS bands were located, excisedfrom the membrane, and destained. Protein amino acids were hydrolyzed onthe membrane overnight with 6 M hydrochloric acid at 110°C. The hydrolysatewas dried and stored at 280°C until subsequent derivatization for GC-TOF-MS analysis.RGRThe RGR of rosette biomass (mg mg21 d21) was determined by estimatingthe slope of the natural logarithm-transformed plant weight measured for atleast 3 d consecutively during the experiment (Hoffmann and Poorter, 2002).RGR from the rosette leaf area (mm2 mm22 d21) was estimated from imagesacquired using a Canon PowerShot SX500 IS digital camera. Area wasextracted from the images using Adobe Photoshop CS5.Estimation of the Change in Protein Content per Day inYoung Growing LeavesCalculation of the rate of protein degradation in young growing leaves (Fig. 3)required information about the rate at which the protein content decreased due tothe relatively large technical error in measuring protein and the limited materialin young leaf samples; this could not be accurately determined in the samplesused for 13C enrichment analysis. In parallel experiments, Arabidopsis Col-0 wasgrown in identical conditions, and after 21 d, sequential leaves were pooled from60 plants, and leaf area and protein were determined from three biological rep-licates (Supplemental Table S3, worksheet leaf protein calculation). The rate of leafinitiation (0.41 leaves d21) was determined in the same material, allowing the datafor leaf area and protein content for each leaf to be plotted on a time scale. Theseplots were inspected to determine the change in protein content per day: DPi =(pi 2 pi+1)/pi, where DPi is the decrease in protein per day in leaf i and pi and pi+1are the leaf protein content in leaf i and the protein content of leaf i the next day,respectively. The protein required per day for growth was calculated as LRGRi 3(1 – DPi), where LRGRi is the LRGR in leaf i obtained from sequential images ofthe rosettes from 10 plants.Supplemental DataThe following supplemental materials are available.Supplemental Figure S1. Enrichment kinetics of organic acids in Col-0growing in an 8-h photoperiod.Supplemental Figure S2. Labeling kinetics for all detected isotopomers ofthe free amino acid pools in a pulse and chase in Col-0 growing in an 8-hphotoperiod.Supplemental Figure S3. Comparison of enrichment in the free amino acidpool with the rate of incorporation of label into the corresponding aminoacid residue in protein.Supplemental Figure S4. Comparison of the 13C washout curve for differ-ent amino acid residues in protein during the chase.Supplemental Figure S5. Determination of the RGR of Col-0 growing in an8-h photoperiod.Supplemental Figure S6. Kinetics of changes in enrichment in free aminoacids during a 24-h pulse in wild-type Col-0 and the starchless pgmmutant growing in an 8-h photoperiod.Supplemental Table S1. Enrichment in free amino acids, other metabo-lites, and amino acids in protein in Col-0 growing in an 8-h photoperiod.Supplemental Table S2. Changes in the levels of amino acids and othermetabolites between dawn and dusk in Col-0 growing in an 8-h photo-period.Supplemental Table S3. Protein synthesis and degradation rates estimatedat different growth stages of leaf development.Supplemental Table S4. Enrichment in free amino acids, other metabo-lites, and amino acids in protein in Col-0 and the starchless mutant pgmgrowing in an 8-h photoperiod.90 Plant Physiol. Vol. 168, 2015Ishihara et al. www.plantphysiol.orgon May 5, 2019 - Published by Downloaded from Copyright © 2015 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.Supplemental Data Set S1. Col-0 growing in an 8-h photoperiod at 20°C.Supplemental Data Set S2. Six stages of leaf development in Col-0 grow-ing in an 8-h photoperiod at 20°C.Supplemental Data Set S3. Col-0 growing in an 8-h photoperiod at 20°Cand 28°C.Supplemental Data Set S4. Enrichment in RBCL and RBCS in the light anddark in Col-0 growing in an 8-h photoperiod at 20°C.Supplemental Data Set S5. Col-0 and the starchless pgm mutant growingin an 8-h photoperiod at 20°C.ACKNOWLEDGMENTSWe thank Christin Abel for help and Stéphanie Arrivault, John E. Lunn,Roosa A.E. Laitinen, and Carlos Figueroa for discussions.Received February 11, 2015; accepted March 25, 2015; published March 25,2015.LITERATURE CITEDAllen DK, Laclair RW, Ohlrogge JB, Shachar-Hill Y (2012) Isotope label-ling of Rubisco subunits provides in vivo information on subcellularbiosynthesis and exchange of amino acids between compartments. PlantCell Environ 35: 1232–1244Amthor JS (2000) The McCree-de Wit-Penning de Vries-Thornley respira-tion paradigms: 30 years later. Ann Bot (Lond) 86: 1–20Antoniewicz MR (2013) Dynamic metabolic ﬂux analysis: tools for probingtransient states of metabolic networks. Curr Opin Biotechnol 24: 973–978Antoniewicz MR, Kelleher JK, Stephanopoulos G (2006) Determination ofconﬁdence intervals of metabolic ﬂuxes estimated from stable isotopemeasurements. Metab Eng 8: 324–337Araújo WL, Tohge T, Ishizaki K, Leaver CJ, Fernie AR (2011) Proteindegradation: an alternative respiratory substrate for stressed plants.Trends Plant Sci 16: 489–498Arrivault S, Guenther M, Florian A, Encke B, Feil R, Vosloh D, Lunn JE,Sulpice R, Fernie AR, Stitt M, et al (2014) Dissecting the subcellularcompartmentation of proteins and metabolites in Arabidopsis leavesusing non-aqueous fractionation. Mol Cell Proteomics 13: 2246–2259Bailey-Serres J (1999) Selective translation of cytoplasmic mRNAs inplants. Trends Plant Sci 4: 142–148Barneix AJ, Cooper HD, Stulen I, Lambers H (1988) Metabolism and translo-cation of nitrogen in two Lolium perenne populations with contrasting rates ofmature leaf respiration and yield. Physiol Plant 72: 631–636Beilharz TH, Preiss T (2004) Translational proﬁling: the genome-widemeasure of the nascent proteome. Brief Funct Genomics Proteomics 3:103–111Bläsing OE, Gibon Y, Günther M, Höhne M, Morcuende R, Osuna D,Thimm O, Usadel B, Scheible WR, Stitt M (2005) Sugars and circadianregulation make major contributions to the global regulation of diurnalgene expression in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 17: 3257–3281Bouma TJ, De Visser R, Janssen JHJA, De Kock MJ, Van Leeuwen PH,Lambers H (1994) Respiratory energy requirements and rate of proteinturnover in vivo determined by the use of an inhibitor of protein syn-thesis and a probe to assess its effect. Physiol Plant 92: 585–594Bradford MM (1976) A rapid and sensitive method for the quantitation ofmicrogram quantities of protein utilizing the principle of protein-dyebinding. Anal Biochem 72: 248–254Branco-Price C, Kaiser KA, Jang CJ, Larive CK, Bailey-Serres J (2008)Selective mRNA translation coordinates energetic and metabolic ad-justments to cellular oxygen deprivation and reoxygenation in Arabi-dopsis thaliana. Plant J 56: 743–755Branco-Price C, Kawaguchi R, Ferreira RB, Bailey-Serres J (2005) Genome-wideanalysis of transcript abundance and translation in Arabidopsis seedlingssubjected to oxygen deprivation. Ann Bot (Lond) 96: 647–660Brauner K, Hörmiller I, Nägele T, Heyer AG (2014) Exaggerated rootrespiration accounts for growth retardation in a starchless mutant ofArabidopsis thaliana. Plant J 79: 82–91Brouquisse R, James F, Raymond P, Pradet A (1991) Study of glucosestarvation in excised maize root tips. Plant Physiol 96: 619–626Buse MG, Reid SS (1975) Leucine: a possible regulator of protein turnoverin muscle. J Clin Invest 56: 1250–1261Caspar T, Huber SC, Somerville CR (1985) Alterations in growth, photo-synthesis, and respiration in a starchless mutant of Arabidopsis thaliana(L.) deﬁcient in chloroplast phosphoglucomutase activity. Plant Physiol79: 11–17Chen WP, Yang XY, Harms GL, Gray WM, Hegeman AD, Cohen JD (2011)An automated growth enclosure for metabolic labeling of Arabidopsisthaliana with 13C-carbon dioxide: an in vivo labeling system for pro-teomics and metabolomics research. Proteome Sci 9: 9Cheung CY, Williams TC, Poolman MG, Fell DA, Ratcliffe RG, Sweetlove LJ(2013) A method for accounting for maintenance costs in ﬂux balance anal-ysis improves the prediction of plant cell metabolic phenotypes under stressconditions. Plant J 75: 1050–1061Cline K, Dabney-Smith C (2008) Plastid protein import and sorting: dif-ferent paths to the same compartments. Curr Opin Plant Biol 11: 585–592Daloso DM, Müller K, Obata T, Florian A, Tohge T, Bottcher A, RiondetC, Bariat L, Carrari F, Nunes-Nesi A, et al (2015) Thioredoxin, a masterregulator of the tricarboxylic acid cycle in plant mitochondria. Proc NatlAcad Sci USA 112: E1392–E1400Dean C, Leech RM (1982) Genome expression during normal leaf devel-opment: 1. Cellular and chloroplast numbers and DNA, RNA, andprotein levels in tissues of different ages within a seven-day-old wheatleaf. Plant Physiol 69: 904–910Detchon P, Possingham JV (1972) Ribosomal-RNA distribution during leafdevelopment in spinach. Phytochemistry 11: 943–947Dungey NO, Davies DD (1982) Protein turnover in the attached leaves ofnon-stressed and stressed barley seedlings. Planta 154: 435–440Eckardt NA, Snyder GW, Portis AR Jr, Orgen WL (1997) Growth andphotosynthesis under high and low irradiance of Arabidopsis thalianaantisense mutants with reduced ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase activase content. Plant Physiol 113: 575–586Ferguson DL, Guikema JA, Paulsen GM (1990) Ubiquitin pool modulationand protein degradation in wheat roots during high temperature stress.Plant Physiol 92: 740–746Foyer CH, Parry M, Noctor G (2003) Markers and signals associated withnitrogen assimilation in higher plants. J Exp Bot 54: 585–593Fraser CM, Chapple C (2011) The phenylpropanoid pathway in Arabi-dopsis. The Arabidopsis Book 9: e0152, doi/10.1199/tab0152Fritz C, Matt P, Müller C, Feil R, Stitt M (2006) Impact of the carbon-nitrogen status on the amino acid proﬁle in tobacco leaves. Plant CellEnviron 29: 2055–2076Galili G (2002) New insights into the regulation and functional signiﬁcanceof lysine metabolism in plants. Annu Rev Plant Biol 53: 27–43Gibon Y, Bläsing O, Hannemann J, Carillo P, Höhne M, Cross J, Selbig J,Stitt M (2004a) A robot-based platform to measure multiple enzymeactivities in Arabidopsis using a set of cycling assays: comparison ofchanges of enzyme activities and transcript levels during diurnal cyclesand in prolonged darkness. Plant Cell 16: 3304–3325Gibon Y, Bläsing OE, Palacios-Rojas N, Pankovic D, Hendriks JHM, Fisahn J,Höhne M, Günther M, Stitt M (2004b) Adjustment of diurnal starch turn-over to short days: depletion of sugar during the night leads to a temporaryinhibition of carbohydrate utilization, accumulation of sugars and post-translational activation of ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase in the followinglight period. Plant J 39: 847–862Gibon Y, Pyl ET, Sulpice R, Lunn JE, Höhne M, Günther M, Stitt M (2009)Adjustment of growth, starch turnover, protein content and centralmetabolism to a decrease of the carbon supply when Arabidopsis isgrown in very short photoperiods. Plant Cell Environ 32: 859–874Gibon Y, Usadel B, Blaesing OE, Kamlage B, Hoehne M, Trethewey R,Stitt M (2006) Integration of metabolite with transcript and enzymeactivity proﬁling during diurnal cycles in Arabidopsis rosettes. GenomeBiol 7: R76Gruhler A, Schulze WX, Matthiesen R, Mann M, Jensen ON (2005) Stableisotope labeling of Arabidopsis thaliana cells and quantitative proteo-mics by mass spectrometry. Mol Cell Proteomics 4: 1697–1709He CY, Merrick BA, Mansﬁeld BK, Hite MC, Daluge DR, Selkirk JK(1991) Comparison of 14C-amino acid mixture and [35S]methionine la-beling of cellular proteins from mouse ﬁbroblast C3H10T1/2 cells bytwo-dimensional gel electrophoresis. Electrophoresis 12: 658–666Heise R, Arrivault S, Szecowka M, Tohge T, Nunes-Nesi A, Stitt M,Nikoloski Z, Fernie AR (2014) Flux proﬁling of photosynthetic carbonmetabolism in intact plants. Nat Protoc 9: 1803–1824Plant Physiol. Vol. 168, 2015 91Protein Synthesis and Degradation in Arabidopsis www.plantphysiol.orgon May 5, 2019 - Published by Downloaded from Copyright © 2015 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.Hoffmann WA, Poorter H (2002) Avoiding bias in calculations of relativegrowth rate. Ann Bot (Lond) 90: 37–42Hsiao TC (1970) Rapid changes in levels of polyribosomes in Zea mays inresponse to water stress. Plant Physiol 46: 281–285Huege J, Goetze J, Dethloff F, Junker B, Kopka J (2014) Quantiﬁcation ofstable isotope label in metabolites via mass spectrometry. Methods MolBiol 1056: 213–223Huege J, Sulpice R, Gibon Y, Lisec J, Koehl K, Kopka J (2007) GC-EI-TOF-MS analysis of in vivo carbon-partitioning into soluble metabolite poolsof higher plants by monitoring isotope dilution after 13CO2 labelling.Phytochemistry 68: 2258–2272Huffaker RC, Peterson LW (1974) Protein turnover in plants and possiblemeans of its regulation. Annu Rev Plant Physiol 25: 363–392Hummel M, Cordewener JHG, de Groot JCM, Smeekens S, AmericaAHP, Hanson J (2012) Dynamic protein composition of Arabidopsisthaliana cytosolic ribosomes in response to sucrose feeding as revealedby label free MSE proteomics. Proteomics 12: 1024–1038Izumi M, Hidema J, Makino A, Ishida H (2013) Autophagy contributes tonighttime energy availability for growth in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol161: 1682–1693Kawaguchi R, Girke T, Bray EA, Bailey-Serres J (2004) Differential mRNAtranslation contributes to gene regulation under non-stress and dehy-dration stress conditions in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant J 38: 823–839Kawaguchi R, Williams AJ, Bray EA, Bailey-Serres J (2003) Water-deﬁcit in-duced translational control inNicotiana tabacum. Plant Cell Environ 26: 221–229Keegstra K, Cline K (1999) Protein import and routing systems of chloro-plasts. Plant Cell 11: 557–570Kopka J, Schauer N, Krueger S, Birkemeyer C, Usadel B, Bergmüller E,Dörmann P, Weckwerth W, Gibon Y, Stitt M, et al (2005) GMD@CSB.DB: the Golm Metabolome Database. Bioinformatics 21: 1635–1638Krueger S, Giavalisco P, Krall L, Steinhauser MC, Büssis D, Usadel B,Flügge UI, Fernie AR, Willmitzer L, Steinhauser D (2011) A topolog-ical map of the compartmentalized Arabidopsis thaliana leaf metabolome.PLoS ONE 6: e17806Kushner DJ, Baker A, Dunstall TG (1999) Pharmacological uses and per-spectives of heavy water and deuterated compounds. Can J PhysiolPharmacol 77: 79–88Lam HM, Coschigano KT, Oliveira IC, Melo-Oliveira R, Coruzzi GM(1996) The molecular genetics of N assimilation into amino acids inhigher plants. Annu Rev Plant Physiol Plant Mol Biol 47: 569–593Lam HM, Hsieh MH, Coruzzi G (1998) Reciprocal regulation of distinctasparagine synthetase genes by light and metabolites in Arabidopsisthaliana. Plant J 16: 345–353Lattanzi FA, Schnyder H, Thornton B (2005) The sources of carbon andnitrogen supplying leaf growth: assessment of the role of stores withcompartmental models. Plant Physiol 137: 383–395Lehmeier CA, Wild M, Schnyder H (2013) Nitrogen stress affects theturnover and size of nitrogen pools supplying leaf growth in a grass.Plant Physiol 162: 2095–2105Li L, Nelson CJ, Solheim C, Whelan J, Millar AH (2012) Determiningdegradation and synthesis rates of Arabidopsis proteins using the ki-netics of progressive 15N labeling of two-dimensional gel-separatedprotein spots. Mol Cell Proteomics 11: M111.010025Lisec J, Schauer N, Kopka J, Willmitzer L, Fernie AR (2006) Gas chro-matography mass spectrometry-based metabolite proﬁling in plants.Nat Protoc 1: 387–396Lodish H, Berk A, Zipursky SL, Matsudaira P, Baltimore D, Darnell J,editors (2011) The dynamic plant cell wall. InMolecular Cell Biology, Ed4. WH Freeman, New York, section 22.5 http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK21709/ (April 15, 2015)Luedemann A, Strassburg K, Erban A, Kopka J (2008) TagFinder for thequantitative analysis of gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS)-based metabolite proﬁling experiments. Bioinformatics 24: 732–737Ma F, Jazmin LJ, Young JD, Allen DK (2014) Isotopically nonstationary13C ﬂux analysis of changes in Arabidopsis thaliana leaf metabolism dueto high light acclimation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 111: 16967–16972Marín-Navarro J, Manuell AL, Wu J, P Mayﬁeld S (2007) Chloroplasttranslation regulation. Photosynth Res 94: 359–374Martin SF, Munagapati VS, Salvo-Chirnside E, Kerr LE, Le Bihan T (2012)Proteome turnover in the green alga Ostreococcus tauri by time course15N metabolic labeling mass spectrometry. J Proteome Res 11: 476–486Masclaux-Daubresse C, Chardon F (2011) Exploring nitrogen remobiliza-tion for seed ﬁlling using natural variation in Arabidopsis thaliana. J ExpBot 62: 2131–2142Mastrobuoni G, Irgang S, Pietzke M, Assmus HE, Wenzel M, SchulzeWX, Kempa S (2012) Proteome dynamics and early salt stress responseof the photosynthetic organism Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. BMC Ge-nomics 13: 215Mitra R, Burton J, Varner JE (1976) Deuterium oxide as a tool for the studyof amino acid metabolism. Anal Biochem 70: 1–17Nelson CJ, Alexova R, Jacoby RP, Millar AH (2014a) Proteins with highturnover rate in barley leaves estimated by proteome analysis combinedwith in planta isotope labeling. Plant Physiol 166: 91–108Nelson CJ, Li L, Jacoby RP, Millar AH (2013) Degradation rate of mito-chondrial proteins in Arabidopsis thaliana cells. J Proteome Res 12: 3449–3459Nelson CJ, Li L, Millar AH (2014b) Quantitative analysis of protein turn-over in plants. Proteomics 14: 579–592Nicolaï M, Roncato MA, Canoy AS, Rouquié D, Sarda X, Freyssinet G,Robaglia C (2006) Large-scale analysis of mRNA translation statesduring sucrose starvation in Arabidopsis cells identiﬁes cell prolifera-tion and chromatin structure as targets of translational control. PlantPhysiol 141: 663–673Ong SE, Blagoev B, Kratchmarova I, Kristensen DB, Steen H, Pandey A,Mann M (2002) Stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture,SILAC, as a simple and accurate approach to expression proteomics.Mol Cell Proteomics 1: 376–386Ong SE, Mann M (2006) A practical recipe for stable isotope labeling byamino acids in cell culture (SILAC). Nat Protoc 1: 2650–2660Pal SK, Liput M, Piques M, Ishihara H, Obata T, Martins MC, Sulpice R, vanDongen JT, Fernie AR, Yadav UP, et al (2013) Diurnal changes of polysomeloading track sucrose content in the rosette of wild-type Arabidopsis and thestarchless pgm mutant. Plant Physiol 162: 1246–1265Pannemans DL, Schaafsma G, Westerterp KR (1997) Calcium excretion,apparent calcium absorption and calcium balance in young and elderlysubjects: inﬂuence of protein intake. Br J Nutr 77: 721–729Penning de Vries FWT (1975) The cost of maintenance processes in plantcells. Ann Bot (Lond) 39: 77–92Penning de Vries FWT, Brunsting AH, van Laar HH (1974) Products, re-quirements and efﬁciency of biosynthesis: a quantitative approach.J Theor Biol 45: 339–377Penning de Vries FWT, Witlage JM, Kremer D (1979) Rates of respirationand of increase in structural dry matter in young wheat, ryegrass andmaize plants in relation to temperature, to water stress and to theirsugar content. Ann Bot (Lond) 44: 595–609Pilkington SM, Encke B, Krohn N, Höhne M, Stitt M, Pyl ET (2015) Re-lationship between starch degradation and carbon demand for mainte-nance and growth in Arabidopsis thaliana in different irradiance andtemperature regimes. Plant Cell Environ 38: 157–171Piques M, Schulze WX, Höhne M, Usadel B, Gibon Y, Rohwer J, Stitt M(2009) Ribosome and transcript copy numbers, polysome occupancy andenzyme dynamics in Arabidopsis. Mol Syst Biol 5: 314Pocrnjic Z, Mathews RW, Rappaport S, Haschemeyer AEV (1983) Quan-titative protein synthetic rates in various tissues of a temperate ﬁsh invivo by the method of phenylalanine swamping. Comp Biochem PhysiolB 74: 735–738Pons T, van Rijnberk H, Scheurwater I, van der Werf A (1993) Importanceof the gradient in photosynthetically active radiation in a vegetationstand for leaf nitrogen allocation in two monocotyledons. Oecologia95: 416–424Poorter H, Nagel O (2000) The role of biomass allocation in the growthresponse of plants to different levels of light, CO2, nutrients and water: aquantitative review. Aust J Plant Physiol 27: 595–607Price J, Laxmi A, St Martin SK, Jang JC (2004) Global transcription pro-ﬁling reveals multiple sugar signal transduction mechanisms in Arabi-dopsis. Plant Cell 16: 2128–2150Pyl ET, Piques M, Ivakov A, Schulze W, Ishihara H, Stitt M, Sulpice R(2012) Metabolism and growth in Arabidopsis depend on the daytimetemperature but are temperature-compensated against cool nights. PlantCell 24: 2443–2469Rapparini F, Cohen J, Slovin J (1999) Indole-3-acetic acid biosynthesis inLemna gibba studied using stable isotope labeled anthranilate andtryptophan. Plant Growth Regul 27: 139–14492 Plant Physiol. Vol. 168, 2015Ishihara et al. www.plantphysiol.orgon May 5, 2019 - Published by Downloaded from Copyright © 2015 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.Riens B, Lohaus G, Heineke D, Heldt HW (1991) Amino acid and sucrosecontent determined in the cytosolic, chloroplastic, and vacuolar com-partments and in the phloem sap of spinach leaves. Plant Physiol 97:227–233Sacchi GA, Cocucci M (1992) Effects of deuterium oxide on growth, protonextrusion, potassium inﬂux, and in vitro plasma membrane activities inmaize root segments. Plant Physiol 100: 1962–1967Saeman JF, Bubl JL, Harris EE (1945) Quantitative sacchariﬁcation of woodand cellulose. Ind Eng Chem 17: 35–37Schaefer J, Skokut TA, Stejskal EO, McKay RA, Varner JE (1981) Esti-mation of protein turnover in soybean leaves using magic angle doublecross-polarization nitrogen 15 nuclear magnetic resonance. J Biol Chem256: 11574–11579Scheible WR, Krapp A, Stitt M (2000) Reciprocal changes of phosphe-nolpyruvate carboxylase and cytosolic pyruvate kinase, citrate synthaseand NADP-isocitrate dehydrogenase expression regulate organic acidmetabolism during nitrate assimilation in tobacco leaves. Plant CellEnviron 23: 1155–1167Scheurwater I, Dünnebacke M, Eising R, Lambers H (2000) Respiratorycosts and rate of protein turnover in the roots of a fast-growing (Dactylisglomerata L.) and a slow-growing (Festuca ovina L.) grass species. J ExpBot 51: 1089–1097Schütz W, Hausmann N, Krug K, Hampp R, Macek B (2011) ExtendingSILAC to proteomics of plant cell lines. Plant Cell 23: 1701–1705Smith AM, Stitt M (2007) Coordination of carbon supply and plant growth.Plant Cell Environ 30: 1126–1149Somerville C, Bauer S, Brininstool G, Facette M, Hamann T, Milne J,Osborne E, Paredez A, Persson S, Raab T, et al (2004) Toward a sys-tems approach to understanding plant cell walls. Science 306: 2206–2211Stitt M, Zeeman SC (2012) Starch turnover: pathways, regulation and rolein growth. Curr Opin Plant Biol 15: 282–292Sulpice R, Flis A, Ivakov AA, Apelt F, KrohnN, Encke B, Abel C, Feil R, Lunn JE,Stitt M (2014) Arabidopsis coordinates the diurnal regulation of carbon alloca-tion and growth across a wide range of photoperiods. Mol Plant 7: 137–155Sweetlove LJ, Obata T, Fernie AR (2014) Systems analysis of metabolicphenotypes: what have we learnt? Trends Plant Sci 19: 222–230Szecowka M, Heise R, Tohge T, Nunes-Nesi A, Vosloh D, Huege J, Feil R,Lunn J, Nikoloski Z, Stitt M, et al (2013) Metabolic ﬂuxes in an illu-minated Arabidopsis rosette. Plant Cell 25: 694–714Tcherkez G, Boex-Fontvieille E, Mahé A, Hodges M (2012a) Respiratorycarbon ﬂuxes in leaves. Curr Opin Plant Biol 15: 308–314Tcherkez G, Mahé A, Guérard F, Boex-Fontvieille ER, Gout E, Lamothe M,Barbour MM, Bligny R (2012b) Short-term effects of CO2 and O2 on citratemetabolism in illuminated leaves. Plant Cell Environ 35: 2208–2220Thimm O, Bläsing O, Gibon Y, Nagel A, Meyer S, Krüger P, Selbig J,Müller LA, Rhee SY, Stitt M (2004) MAPMAN: a user-driven tool todisplay genomics data sets onto diagrams of metabolic pathways andother biological processes. Plant J 37: 914–939Thomson JF (1963) Biological Effects of Deuterium. Pergamon Press, NewYork, pp 4–5Tovar-Méndez A, Miernyk JA, Randall DD (2003) Regulation of pyruvatedehydrogenase complex activity in plant cells. Eur J Biochem 270: 1043–1049Tschoep H, Gibon Y, Carillo P, Armengaud P, Szecowka M, Nunes-NesiA, Fernie AR, Koehl K, Stitt M (2009) Adjustment of growth and centralmetabolism to a mild but sustained nitrogen-limitation in Arabidopsis.Plant Cell Environ 32: 300–318Urbanczyk-Wochniak E, Baxter C, Kolbe A, Kopka J, Sweetlove LJ, Fernie AR(2005) Proﬁling of diurnal patterns of metabolite and transcript abundance inpotato (Solanum tuberosum) leaves. Planta 221: 891–903Usadel B, Bläsing OE, Gibon Y, Höhne M, Günter M, Stitt M (2008)Global transcript levels respond to small changes of the carbon statusduring progressive exhaustion of carbohydrates in Arabidopsis rosettes.Plant Physiol 146: 1834–1861Weiner H, Heldt HW (1992) Inter- and intracellular distribution of aminoacids and other metabolites in maize (Zea mays L.) leaves. Planta 187:242–246Williams TC, Poolman MG, Howden AJ, Schwarzlander M, Fell DA,Ratcliffe RG, Sweetlove LJ (2010) A genome-scale metabolic modelaccurately predicts ﬂuxes in central carbon metabolism under stressconditions. Plant Physiol 154: 311–323Winter H, Lohaus G, Heldt HW (1992) Phloem transport of amino acids inrelation to their cytosolic levels in barley leaves. Plant Physiol 99: 996–1004Yang XY, Chen WP, Rendahl AK, Hegeman AD, Gray WM, Cohen JD(2010) Measuring the turnover rates of Arabidopsis proteins usingdeuterium oxide: an auxin signaling case study. Plant J 63: 680–695Yee JC, Jacob NM, Jayapal KP, Kok YJ, Philp R, Grifﬁn TJ, Hu WS (2010)Global assessment of protein turnover in recombinant antibody pro-ducing myeloma cells. J Biotechnol 148: 182–193Young JD, Shastri AA, Stephanopoulos G, Morgan JA (2011) Mappingphotoautotrophic metabolism with isotopically nonstationary 13C ﬂuxanalysis. Metab Eng 13: 656–665Yuan J, Bennett BD, Rabinowitz JD (2008) Kinetic ﬂux proﬁling forquantitation of cellular metabolic ﬂuxes. Nat Protoc 3: 1328–1340Yuan J, Fowler WU, Kimball E, Lu W, Rabinowitz JD (2006) Kinetic ﬂuxproﬁling of nitrogen assimilation in Escherichia coli. Nat Chem Biol 2:529–530Zhou H, Li W, Wang SP, Mendoza V, Rosa R, Hubert J, Herath K,McLaughlin T, Rohm RJ, Lassman ME, et al (2012) Quantifying apo-protein synthesis in rodents: coupling LC-MS/MS analyses with theadministration of labeled water. J Lipid Res 53: 1223–1231Plant Physiol. Vol. 168, 2015 93Protein Synthesis and Degradation in Arabidopsis www.plantphysiol.orgon May 5, 2019 - Published by Downloaded from Copyright © 2015 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.CORRECTIONSVol. 168: 74–93, 2015Ishihara H., Obata T., Sulpice R., Fernie A.R., and Stitt M. Quantifying Protein Synthesis andDegradation in Arabidopsis by Dynamic 13CO2 Labeling and Analysis of Enrichment inIndividual Amino Acids in Their Free Pools and in Protein.In the “Discussion,” the sentence “However, they do not provide a quantitative explanationfor the growth inhibition; indeed, the increase in respiration accounts for only a smallproportion of the assimilated C.” should be corrected to “However, they do not providea quantitative explanation for the growth inhibition in short photoperiods (but for longphotoperiods, see Brauner et al., 2014).”In short photoperiods, phosphoglucomutase become severely carbon starved at night, leadingto large-scale changes in gene expression and an inhibition of growth in the night. Theinhibition of growth is smaller in long photoperiods. Brauner et al. (2014) show that rootrespiration is increased in phosphoglucomutase in long photoperiods. By modeling thewhole-plant carbon balance, they show that this increase in root respiration largely accountsfor the inhibition of growth in long photoperiods.We thank Katrin Brauner for drawing our attention to the role of root respiration in longphotoperiods.www.plantphysiol.org/cgi/doi/10.1104/pp.15.00771Plant Physiology, July 2015, Vol. 168, p. 1179, www.plantphysiol.org  2015 American Society of Plant Biologists. All Rights Reserved. 1179