                          Hammann, S., Korf, A., Bull, I. D., Hayen, H., & Cramp, L. J. E.
(2019). Lipid profiling and analytical discrimination of seven cereals
using high temperature gas chromatography coupled to high
resolution quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometry. Food
Chemistry, 282, 27-35.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2018.12.109
Peer reviewed version
License (if available):
CC BY-NC-ND
Link to published version (if available):
10.1016/j.foodchem.2018.12.109
Link to publication record in Explore Bristol Research
PDF-document
This is the author accepted manuscript (AAM). The final published version (version of record) is available online
via Elsevier at https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0308814619300184 Please refer to any
applicable terms of use of the publisher.
University of Bristol - Explore Bristol Research
General rights
This document is made available in accordance with publisher policies. Please cite only the
published version using the reference above. Full terms of use are available:
http://www.bristol.ac.uk/red/research-policy/pure/user-guides/ebr-terms/
 
1 
 
Lipid profiling and analytical discrimination of seven cereals using high 
temperature gas chromatography coupled to high resolution quadrupole time-
of-flight mass spectrometry 
 
Simon Hammann1,2 *, Ansgar Korf3, Ian D. Bull2, Heiko Hayen3 and Lucy J. E. Cramp1  
 
1 Department of Anthropology and Archaeology, University of Bristol, Bristol BS8 
1UU, United Kingdom 
2 Organic Geochemistry Unit, School of Chemistry, University of Bristol, Bristol BS8 
1TS, United Kingdom 
3 Institute of Inorganic and Analytical Chemistry, University of Münster, 
Corrensstraße 30, 48149 Münster, Germany 
 
* Corresponding author  
+44 (0) 117 954 6083 
simon.hammann@bristol.ac.uk  
Formatted
 
2 
 
Abstract 
Minor lipids in cereals (such as phytosterols and alkylresorcinols) can be 
important for human nutrition and/or be used as biomarkers for cereal intake. 
However, the analysis of cereal lipids is very challenging due to the complex lipidome 
comprising several hundred individual compounds present over a wide-range of 
concentrations.  
Here we present a method for the profiling of cereal lipids using high 
temperature gas chromatography coupled to high resolution mass spectrometry 
(GC/Q-TOF MS). The method was used to investigate the lipid profiles of 77 samples 
of bread wheat, spelt, einkorn, emmer, barley, rye and oats. 
Distinct differences in the patterns of alkylresorcinols, free and conjugated 
sterols and tocopherols between the cereals could be observed. Furthermore, traces 
of tocomonoenols and diunsaturated and methyl-alkylresorcinols (not previously 
reported in cereals) could be detected. Finally, the lipid patterns in the cereals could 
be used to separate the cereals by Principle Component Analysis. 
 
 
Keywords: Cereal; Gas chromatography; Mass spectrometry; lipid; sterol; 
alkylresorcinol; tocopherol; Principle Component Analysis 
  
 
3 
 
1. Introduction 
Although cereals have only been a part of human diet for roughly 10 000 years, 
they nowadays are a staple in most parts of the world. In 2017, the global production 
of cereals exceeded 2.5 billion tonnes, with wheat and rice comprising almost half 
(Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations, 2018). Cereals are usually 
the primary dietary source of carbohydrates and therefore important for their calorific 
value, but they also contain proteins and lipids at lower concentrations, as well as 
several essential vitamins (McKevith, 2004).  
Cereal lipids comprise a very complex mixture of compounds that are 
distributed in the cereal grain. A common concept is their classification as either 
“starch lipids” or “non-starch lipids” (Morrison, 1988) based on their association with 
starch granules in the cereal. An alternative categorisation, based on molecular 
structure, leads to classifications such as “polar” and “non-polar lipids”, with 
glycerophospholipids or mono- and digalactosyldiacylglycerols being the most 
prominent members of the former category. Non-polar lipids include triacylglycerols, 
sterols and sterol esters and tocopherols. However, it should be noted that there are 
no strict rules for classification.  
Several minor compounds in the lipid fraction have attracted attention due to 
the health benefits for humans associated with them. Plant sterols and their conjugates 
(Figure 1a-d), as found in cereals, can lower the plasma cholesterol levels in humans 
and thus lower the risk of cardiovascular diseases. Similarly, tocols (Vitamin E) (Figure 
1e-g) and alkylresorcinols (Figure 1h) are considered to be valuable dietary 
antioxidants and anticarcinogens that can help to prevent cell damage in vitro (Panfili, 
 
4 
 
Fratianni, & Irano, 2003; Piironen, Toivo, & Lampi, 2002; Ross, Shepherd, 
Schüpphaus, Sinclair, Alfaro, Kamal-Eldin, et al., 2003).  
The direct analysis of these minor compounds is often challenging due to their 
low concentration in cereals (often less than 0.1 mg/g) and the complex mixture of 
concomitant lipids potentially coeluting with them. Recently, Prinsen et al. analysed 
lipids from wheat bran by gas chromatography coupled to flame ionisation detection 
and mass spectrometry (GC-FID and GC-MS) using short and medium length columns 
(5 and15 m). While a large number of compounds could be identified, many coelutions 
resulting from sample complexity, could be observed (Prinsen, Gutierrez, Faulds, & 
del Rio, 2014). To mitigate this issue, different approaches have been proposed. 
Alkaline saponification of the lipids, as frequently employed for sterol analysis, can be 
used to hydrolyse all ester bonds, leading to a simplification of the lipid spectrum (Cert, 
Moreda, & Pérez-Camino, 2000). Subsequently, the free fatty acids can be easily 
separated, effectively enriching unsaponifiable compounds such as sterols or aliphatic 
alcohols (Cert, Moreda, & Pérez-Camino, 2000). However, this step is laborious and 
leads to a loss of information about the native distribution of lipids; it can also result in 
the degradation of lipids (e.g. tocols) or the formation of artefacts (Abidi, 2001; 
Rupérez, Martıń, Herrera, & Barbas, 2001).  
A second approach is the selective isolation of chosen lipid classes of interest 
from the total lipid extract (TLE) by chromatographic methods prior to analysis (Ruiz-
Gutierrez & Perez-Camino, 2000). While well-established and effective, these 
methods similarly only allow for certain lipids to be investigated (loss of information). 
By employing selective detection techniques, e.g. by coupling high performance liquid 
chromatography to fluorescence detection (HPLC-FLD) or using LC-MS or GC-MS in 
the selected ion monitoring or selective reaction monitoring modes, pre-selected 
 
5 
 
compounds can be detected with high sensitivity and selectivity, although again with 
the caveat of being restricted to a few chosen targets. 
One way to mitigate these drawbacks is through optimisation of the analytical system 
to allow the separation, detection and identification of an increased number of 
compounds. The two major strategies to achieve this are to extend the elution window 
(e.g. through higher GC operation temperatures) or by increasing selectivity, 
particularly through multidimensional chromatographic approaches. Comprehensive 
LC x GC and GC x GC coupled to mass spectrometry were indeed used to great effect 
for the detailed investigation of total lipid patterns and the parallel screening of multiple 
classes of minor lipids (Janssen, de Koning, & Brinkman, 2004; Purcaro, Barp, 
Beccaria, & Conte, 2016).  
In this study we combined gas chromatography and high resolution quadrupole-
time-of-flight mass spectrometry (GC/Q-TOF MS) for the profiling of GC-amenable 
lipids in cereals. By extending the GC elution window to 350 ºC TLEs could be 
analysed without any prior hydrolysis step, therefore preserving the original lipid 
composition. Through the acquisition of high resolution full-scan mass spectrometry 
data, information on multiple compound classes (with the increased selectivity and 
certainty of identification provided by high mass accuracy) could be obtained 
simultaneously thereby retaining the capability to retrospectively inspect data for other 
novel compounds of interest. Recently, this method was used to profile cereal lipids to 
detect and identify cereal lipid biomarkers to be used in archaeological research 
(Hammann & Cramp, 2018). Here we use this new approach to analyse the lipids from 
77 samples of bread wheat, spelt, einkorn, emmer, barley, rye and oats and compare 
their lipid profiles with a particular focus on the lipids present at low concentration. In 
addition, the study aimed to investigate whether the distributions of the GC-amenable 
 
6 
 
lipids could be used to discriminate between the seven cereal classes investigated in 
this study and be used to test the authenticity of cereals. 
 
2. Materials and Methods 
 
2.1 Chemicals 
n-Hexane, dichloromethane (DCM), chloroform and methanol (all HPLC grade) 
were purchased from Rathburn Chemicals (Walkerburn, UK), while the silylating agent 
BSTFA/TMCS 99:1 (v/v) was purchased from Supelco (Bellefonte, PA, USA). Pyridine 
(>99%), palmitic acid, methyl heptadecanoate (17:0-ME), methyl stearate, stearic 
acid, cholesterol, 1-palmitoyl-glycerol, dipalmitoyl-glycerol, trimyristate, tripalmitate, 
tristearate (all >99%), tetratriacontane (n-C34, 98%), and silica were purchased from 
Sigma-Aldrich (Irvine, UK). Cholesteryl oleate (97%) was purchased from Lancaster 
Synthesis (Morecambe, UK) and an authentic standard of 5-n-docosylresorcinol (AR-
22, >99%) was purchased from ReseaChem (Burgdorf, Switzerland). All glass 
consumables (test tubes, pipettes, vials, chromatography columns) were heated in a 
muffle furnace at 450 ºC for 4h prior to use. 
 
2.2 Samples 
Grain samples of bread wheat (Triticum aestivum, n=14), einkorn (Triticum 
monococcum, n=11), emmer (Triticum dicoccum, n=14), spelt (Triticum spelta, n=10), 
barley (Hordeum vulgare, n=11), oats (Avena sativa) and rye (Secale cereale, n=8) 
were sourced from collections of collaborating researchers, the Max Rubner Institute 
 
7 
 
(Detmold, Germany), the John Innes Centre (Norwich, UK) (Horler, Turner, Fretter, & 
Ambrose, 2018), and the Leibniz Institute of Plant Genetics and Crop Plant Research 
(IPK, Gatersleben, Germany). The varieties chosen for analysis were predominantly 
local landraces from Europe. A detailed sample list can be found in Table S1 
(Supporting information). 
 
2.3 Extraction of cereals 
Lipid extraction was performed as described previously (Hammann & Cramp, 
2018). In short, cereals were ground using a mortar and pestle and the lipids were 
extracted using chloroform/methanol 2:1 (v/v) (2x10 mL) and n-hexane (10 mL). 
Aliquots of the TLEs were cleaned on a small chromatography column (1 cm i. 
d.) to remove GC-unamenable polar lipids such as glycerophospholipids. The column 
was filled with 0.5 g activated silica and conditioned with 5 mL chloroform/methanol 
2:1 (v/v) before sample solutions were applied and eluted with 5 mL 
chloroform/methanol 2:1 (v/v). The eluate was pipetted into a 1.75 mL vial and the 
solvent was removed under a gentle stream of nitrogen. Afterwards, the residue was 
re-dissolved in 1 mL chloroform/methanol 2:1 (v/v). 
 
2.4 Derivatisation 
Pyridine (25 µL) and 50 µL of the silylating agent (BSTFA/TMCS 99:1, v/v) were 
added to a dried aliquot of the silica-cleaned TLE (250 µL), the vial was tightly sealed 
and heated at 70 ºC for 1h. After cooling, pyridine and excess derivatisation agent 
were removed under a gentle stream of nitrogen, and the residue was re-dissolved in 
 
8 
 
0.5 mL of n-hexane. After addition of 6 µg of the second internal standard, methyl 
heptadecanoate, this solution was analysed by GC-FID and GC/Q-TOF MS. 
 
2.5 GC-FID analysis of trimethylsilylated lipid extracts 
Trimethylsilylated TLEs were analysed using a 7890 GC-FID instrument 
(Agilent, Santa Clara, CA/USA) as described previously (Hammann & Cramp, 2018). 
A 15 m, 0.32 mm i.d., 0.1 µm film thickness DB-1HT column (100 % 
dimethylpolysiloxane, Agilent, Santa Clara, CA/USA) was used for the separation, and 
injections (1 µL) were made using a 7683B autosampler via a cool-on-column inlet. 
Helium was used as the carrier gas at a constant flow rate of 4.0 mL/min. The GC 
temperature program was as follows: After 2 minutes at 50 ºC, the temperature was 
raised at a rate of 10 ºC/min to 350 ºC (held for 10 min). The temperature of the inlet 
was set to track the oven temperature and the FID temperature was set to 350 ºC 
while flow rates of hydrogen, air and nitrogen were set to 30, 400 and 27 mL/min, 
respectively. 
 
2.6 GC/Q-TOF MS analysis of trimethylsilylated lipid extracts 
Subsequent to GC-FID analysis, TLEs were analysed by a 7890 GC coupled 
to a 7200B GC/Q-TOF MS (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA). Injections (1 µL) were 
made using 7693 autosampler and a cool-on-column inlet, which was set to follow the 
oven temperature. A 15 m, 0.25 mm i.d., 0.1 µm film thickness ZB-5HT Inferno column 
(Phenomenex, Torrance, CA, USA) was installed in the GC oven. Helium was used 
as the carrier gas at a flow rate of 1.5 mL/min and the GC oven was programmed as 
 
9 
 
follows: After 2 min at 55 ºC the temperature was increased to 220 ºC at a rate of 10 
ºC/min followed by an increase to 350 ºC at 20 ºC/min (held for 13 minutes). 
The temperatures of the ion source, quadrupole and transfer line were set to 
300 ºC, 180 ºC and 350 ºC, respectively. Data were acquired, following a solvent delay 
of six minutes, in full scan mode from m/z 50-1050 with a sample rate of 5 spectra/s 
using the Extended Dynamic Range mode. A standard mix consisting of palmitic acid, 
stearic acid, methyl heptadecanoate, methyl stearate, 1-palmitoyl-glycerol, 
cholesterol, tetratriacontane, dipalmitoyl-glycerol, trimyristate, cholesteryl oleate, 
tripalmitate, and tristearate was analysed (after silylation) with every standard batch 
to ascertain chromatographic and mass spectrometric performance.  
 GC/Q-TOF MS data were analysed using MassHunter Qual (Version B.07.00), 
and MassProfiler Pro (Version B.14.5) (both Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA) and 
further processed using a MZmine 2 workflow (see section 2.7). 
 
2.7. Data processing workflow for statistical analysis 
An optimized MZmine 2 (version 2.36) workflow has been developed to generate an 
aligned feature list for statistical analysis (Pluskal, Castillo, Villar-Briones, & Orešič, 
2010). A feature can be perceived as a row of a matrix, which describes a peak in 
retention time dimension with a corresponding m/z value. This matrix is called a 
feature list. An aligned feature list consists of multiple feature lists, whose features 
have been compared and if found equal with respect to a certain m/z and retention 
time window are aligned to the same matrix row. Prior to the data processing itself, 
raw data conversion was applied to the open format mzML using MSConvert to enable 
MZmine 2 compatibility (Chambers, Maclean, Burke, Amodei, Ruderman, Neumann, 
 
10 
 
et al., 2012). The MZmine 2 workflow contained the recursive threshold mass 
detection algorithm, with a noise level set to 100 for the first 20 minutes and 500 for 
the time window of 20 - 38.5 minutes. The minimum peak m/z width was set to 0.05 
and the maximum peak m/z width was set to 1. The mass detection was separated in 
two groups with different noise levels, due to a significantly higher baseline, starting at 
approximately 20 min. The resulting mass lists were used for chromatogram building, 
which included the parameter minimum time span, which was set to 0.02 minutes. The 
value sets the minimum time for which the same ion must be observed to be 
recognized as a chromatogram. A minimum peak intensity was set to 1000 and the 
relative mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm. All chromatograms were smoothed over 13 
data points. The next step was chromatogram deconvolution by applying the local 
minimum search algorithm, including a chromatographic threshold of 90%, a minimum 
peak top/edge ratio of 2, a minimum peak intensity set to 1000 and a maximum peak 
duration of 2 minutes. To further reduce the size of the data, isotopic features were 
removed by applying the isotopic peaks grouper algorithm. The parameters for the 
algorithm were set to a relative mass accuracy of 5 ppm, a retention time tolerance of 
0.05 minutes and the maximum allowed charge was set to 1. To deal with retention 
time shifts occurring in the large data set, mainly caused by column maintenance 
(trimming), retention time normalization was performed using the MZmine 2 retention 
time normaliser algorithm with the parameters 20 ppm as m/z tolerance, 1 minute as 
retention time tolerance and 1000 as minimum intensity of the peak selected for 
normalisation. All feature lists were then aligned using the join aligner algorithm with 
m/z tolerance set to 25 ppm and retention time tolerance was set to 0.5 min. To fill in 
missing values of the aligned feature list, the “same m/z and RT range filler” gap filling 
algorithm was applied with an m/z tolerance of 20 ppm. The resulting aligned feature 
 
11 
 
list was exported with the Export to MetaboAnalyst file method. The exported .csv file 
was uploaded to the MetaboAnalyst 4.0 web server for further data processing 
(Chong, Soufan, Li, Caraus, Li, Bourque, et al., 2018). The data was uploaded as Peak 
intensity table with Samples in columns (unpaired) format and was normalized using 
the generalized logarithm (glog) transformation. The final matrix was processed for 
Principle Component Analysis (PCA) and Random Forest feature search using 
MetaboAnalyst 4.0. 
 
3. Results and discussion 
3.1 Lipid analysis by GC-FID and GC/Q-TOF MS 
3.1.1 Analysis of cereal lipid extracts by GC-FID and contents of GC-amenable lipids 
in cereal samples 
With our set-up we were able to analyse GC-amenable lipids without prior 
hydrolysis. The first lipid compounds to elute were usually free fatty acids, followed by 
monoacylglycerols, alkylresorcinols, tocols and free sterols. This was followed by the 
elution of diacylglycerides and conjugated sterols (sterol fatty acid esters and sterol 
glycosides) before finally triacylglycerols (TAGs, usually C48 to C56 and, rarely, C58) 
eluted (. This means that compounds up to a molecular weight of about 900 Da could 
be eluted and analysed at a maximum GC oven temperature of 350 ºC. This was 
deemed appropriate since TAGs are generally the least volatile lipids of interest.  
The highest lipid contents (as determined by GC-FID) were observed in oat 
samples (median 38.2 mg/g dry matter), which was significantly higher than in the 
other cereals (median values of 7.2 – 16.9 mg/g dry matter) (Table S2). It should be 
noted that with this method we could only detect GC-amenable lipids, which excluded 
 
12 
 
some abundant polar lipids such as glycerophospholipids that were removed during 
sample preparation (section 2.3). Furthermore, the lipid extracts also contained some 
non-lipid compounds, i.e. peaks relating to saccharide structures. 
3.1.2 Analysis of cereal lipid extracts by GC/Q-TOF MS 
 
Despite the slightly higher polarity of the GC stationary phase in GC/Q-TOF MS 
the general elution pattern was the same as in GC-FID analysis (Figure 2a) and mass 
spectra for several hundred individual compounds in the samples could be acquired. 
Furthermore, extracted ion chromatograms, using the accurate mass of individual 
compounds (e.g. m/z 486.4257 for the molecular ion of trimethylsilylated sitosterol) or 
compound classes (e.g. m/z 268.1315 for bis-trimethylsilylated alkylresorcinols) with 
an extraction window of ± 10 ppm, facilitated searching and detecting compounds of 
interest, and determining distributions of compounds that could then be compared 
between samples. Importantly, non-targeted peak-picking and deconvolution 
workflows could be used on the dataset to find unknown compounds and those not 
readily detected due to co-elution (see sections 2.7 and 3.5). Although identification 
without corresponding reference compounds can be difficult, the number of detected 
(and potentially identifiable) compounds was greatly increased using this approach. In 
the following sections we will specifically focus on the data on the patterns of sterols 
(section 3.2), tocopherols, tocomonoenols, tocotrienols (section 3.3), and 
alkylresorcinols (section 3.4) in the cereal samples. 
 
3.2. Free and conjugated sterols detected by GC/Q-TOF MS in the cereal lipid 
extracts 
 
13 
 
Cereals are an important source of dietary phytosterols in human nutrition 
(Piironen, Toivo, & Lampi, 2002). Phytosterols have been attributed with cholesterol-
lowering effects in humans and are therefore, in terms of nutrition, particularly 
desirable components of cereals. Critically, the bioavailability and physiological effects 
in humans can vary between free and conjugated sterols (Nyström, Moreau, Lampi, 
Hicks, & Piironen, 2008).  
Sterols could be detected as free sterols, esterified to fatty acids and ferulic 
acid, and as steryl glucosides (Figure 1a-d). The first sterol compounds to elute from 
the GC were the free sterols, followed by glucosides, and finally fatty acid (C16 and 
C18) and ferulic acid esters (Figure 2b, Table 1). In the free sterol fraction, up to 10 
sterols could be identified. The main sterols identified (See Table S3, supporting 
information) were sitosterol and campesterol alongside their corresponding saturated 
stanol analogues, i.e. stigmastanol and campestanol (Piironen, Toivo, & Lampi, 2002). 
Further minor sterols included stigmasterol, Δ5-avenasterol and 24-methylene-
cycloartanol. A few samples exhibited a prominent peak eluting shortly before 
campesterol, which was identified as ergosterol. Ergosterol is the predominant sterol 
in several fungi and the detection of ergosterol could mean that these particular 
samples had been infected (Perkowski, Buśko, Stuper, Kostecki, Matysiak, & 
Szwajkowska-Michałek, 2008; Varga, Bartók, & Mesterházy, 2006). This 
demonstrates the added-value of this method as a quality screening tool for 
contamination and spoilage. 
In the conjugated sterol fraction, C16 and C18 fatty acid esters of campesterol, 
campestanol, stigmasterol, sitosterol, stigmastanol, and Δ5-avenasterol were detected 
in all samples, but in varying compositions. Whilst C18 esters dominated over C16 
esters in most bread wheat samples, as well as einkorn, emmer and oats, they were 
 
14 
 
about the same intensity in rye; finally, barley and spelt samples contained higher 
relative concentrations of the C16 esters (Table 1). Owing to the non-polar nature of 
the stationary phase, no separation of the esters with degrees of fatty acid 
unsaturation could be achieved and potential differences in the C18 fatty acid 
composition could not be observed. In addition to fatty acid esters, ferulic acid esters 
of campestanol and stigmastanol were also detectable at low concentrations in 
samples of bread wheat, einkorn, emmer, spelt, and rye. Campestanol esters were 
more abundant than the corresponding stigmastanol esters (Figure S1, supporting 
Information). The esters eluted as two sets of peaks, with the earlier eluting cis-
isomers being less abundant than the later eluting trans isomers. The relatively high 
abundance of the cis-isomers was likely due to isomerisation from light during sample 
preparation (Esche, Barnsteiner, Scholz, & Engel, 2012). 
Finally, campesterol, campestanol, stigmasterol, sitosterol, stigmastanol, and 
Δ5-avenasterol could also be detected as glycosides and identified based on their 
mass spectra (Gutiérrez & del Río, 2001) (Table 1, Table S3, supporting information). 
Furthermore, eluting very late, together with triacylglycerides, peaks tentatively 
identified as acylated steryl glycosides were detected. However, due to their late 
elution and low concentrations no unequivocal mass spectra could be gathered. 
 
3.3 Tocopherols, tocotrienols and tocomonoenols detected by GC/Q-TOF MS in 
bread wheat, einkorn, emmer, spelt, barley, rye, and oats 
Tocopherols and tocotrienols, although only present at total levels of <0.1 mg/g 
could be readily detected and identified from their characteristic mass spectra, which 
enabled determination of the number of methyl groups on the 6-chromanol ring, as 
 
15 
 
well as the number of double bonds in the isoprenic side chain. For example, α-
tocopherol (Figure 1e) yielded a molecular ion (as its TMS ester) at m/z 502.4195 (-
2.2 ppm) and the chromanol ring-characteristic tropylium fragment-ion at m/z 
237.1289 (- 9.3 ppm). In contrast, in the mass spectrum of α-tocotrienol the molecular 
ion was detected at m/z 496.3715 (corresponding to a difference of 6 hydrogen atoms 
or 3 double bonds, -4.4 ppm), whilst γ-tocopherol was identified by the molecular ion 
at m/z 488.4037 (-2.6 ppm) and the tropylium fragment ion at m/z 223.1146 
(corresponding to the substitution of one methyl group by a hydrogen, -4.0 ppm). It 
should be noted that β- and γ- only differ in the substitution pattern and are not readily 
resolved by the GC column used in this study. They also have very similar mass 
spectra, but we noted a higher intensity of the fragment ion at m/z 222.1076 over m/z 
223.1155 in the GC/Q-TOF mass spectra of β/γ-T in all cereals but not in barley. Of 
all the investigated cereals, only barley has been reported to contain predominantly 
the γ-isomer, while in the other cereals the β-isomer was dominant. This fragmentation 
behaviour could be confirmed with authentic standards of β- and γ-tocopherol, and 
while it does not allow to accurately quantify the contributions of β- and γ-isomers it 
could potentially allow the qualitative estimation of the dominant isomer.   
In total up to 6 distinct tocol peaks could be detected in the samples, but the 
distributions differed for the cereal classes. While the tocol distribution in rye samples 
was dominated by α-tocopherol, einkorn samples (as shown in Figure 2c) exhibited  
β-/γ-tocotrienol as the most abundant isomer. The distributions in the cereals used for 
this study were not fully consistent with previous literature reports (Panfili, Fratianni, & 
Irano, 2003; Ryynänen, Lampi, Salo-Väänänen, Ollilainen, & Piironen, 2004). While 
the ratios of α-tocopherol to β-/γ-tocopherol are consistent with literature reports, 
markedly lower contributions of the corresponding tocotrienols were found in this 
 
16 
 
study. Tocotrienols are particularly liable to oxidation and degradation and the sample 
preparation protocol used was not optimised to mitigate this (Rupérez, Martıń, Herrera, 
& Barbas, 2001). The addition of antioxidants such as butylated hydroxytoluene to the 
extraction solutions might be a way to fully retain the original vitamin E distribution in 
future research. 
 
In addition to tocopherols and tocotrienols α-and β-/γ-tocomonoenols (Figure 
1f) were also detected at concentrations of about 1-2% of the corresponding 
tocopherols (Figure 2c). These monounsaturated tocopherol-derivatives, having only 
recently come into scientific focus, have been detected in a few matrices, but little is 
yet known about their occurrence and physiological role (Butinar, Bucar-Miklavcic, 
Mariani, & Raspor, 2011; Fiorentino, Mastellone, D’Abrosca, Pacifico, Scognamiglio, 
Cefarelli, et al., 2009; Müller, Hammann, & Vetter, 2018). These minor compounds 
eluted slightly after the corresponding tocopherols, and could be identified by their 
mass spectra, i.e. the tropylium fragment ion at m/z 237.1328 (+7.2 ppm) and the 
molecular ion at m/z 500.4024 (-5.0 ppm) for α-tocomonoenol. As far as can be 
ascertained, this is the first report of the presence of these compounds in cereals. 
 
3.4 Alkylresorcinol distributions in bread wheat, einkorn, emmer, spelt, barley, 
rye, and oats 
Alkylresorcinols (ARs) are a class of compounds that share a common 
resorcinol backbone with an alkyl substituent at the meta-position Figure 1h). Through 
alkyl chains of different carbon numbers several homologues are possible, and they 
have been frequently detected in cereals such as bread wheat, spelt, rye or barley 
 
17 
 
(Landberg, Kamal-Eldin, Salmenkallio-Marttila, Rouau, & Åman, 2008; Ross, Åman, 
Andersson, & Kamal-Eldin, 2004; Ross, Kamal-Eldin, Jung, Shepherd, & Åman, 2001; 
Ross, et al., 2003; Ziegler, Steingass, Longin, Würschum, Carle, & Schweiggert, 
2015).  
Alkylresorcinols were detected at appreciable quantities in all cereals but oats, 
which only contained traces (Figure 3). In general, ARs with chain-lengths of 15–27 
carbon atoms (predominantly odd-numbered isomers) were detectable. In addition to 
the alkylresorcinols the corresponding unsaturated alkenylresorcinols, with a double 
bond in the alkyl chain, could be detected. These alkenylresorcinols eluted slightly 
earlier from the GC than the corresponding saturated homologue and could be 
identified by a combination of the base ion at m/z 268.1315 and the molecular ion 
which was shifted to a lower mass by 2.0157 Da (corresponding to two hydrogens or 
one double bond) compared to the respective saturated isomer (e.g. the molecular 
ions for the bis-TMS derivatives of AR-21 and AR-21:1 were detected at m/z 548.4455 
(+1.8 ppm) and 546.4263 (-4.7 ppm), respectively). The alkenylresorcinols were 
particularly abundant in rye (about 10% of the corresponding saturated analogue) as 
previously reported by Ross et al. and Suzuki et al. (Ross, et al., 2003; Suzuki, Esumi, 
Uramoto, Kono, & Sakurai, 1997).  
 The distribution and pattern of AR homologues differed markedly between the 
different cereals (Table 2, Table S4). For example, barley samples exhibited AR-25 as 
the major AR component; this was unique in the cereals investigated. In contrast, all 
the Triticum species (bread wheat, spelt, einkorn and emmer) exhibited AR-21 as the 
main component, whilst the most abundant AR in rye was AR-19. In oats, only minute 
traces of AR-19 and AR-21 could be detected with this general absence of ARs being 
in accordance with the literature (Ross, et al., 2003). It should be noted that AR 
 
18 
 
distributions did not only vary between cereal classes but also within one class. In 
emmer the contributions of AR-19 and AR-25 to the total AR content varied between 
5 and 25% and 2 and 10%, respectively (Table S4). This demonstrated that different 
varieties and cultivation conditions could affect the concentration and relative 
distribution of ARs (Andersson, Kamal-Eldin, & Åman, 2010).  
In general, our results for the AR composition were in-line with previously 
reported values for the cereals investigated here (Hengtrakul, Lorenz, & Mathias, 
1991; Landberg, Kamal-Eldin, Salmenkallio-Marttila, Rouau, & Åman, 2008; Ross, 
Kamal-Eldin, Jung, Shepherd, & Åman, 2001; Ross, et al., 2003; Żarnowski, Suzuki, 
Yamaguchi, & Pietr, 2002; Ziegler, Steingass, Longin, Würschum, Carle, & 
Schweiggert, 2015).  
 
3.4.1 Further minor alkylresorcinols detected by GC/Q-TOF MS  
In addition to the aforementioned monounsaturated alkenylresorcinols, further 
minor compounds which contributed even less (<<0.1%) to the AR distribution were 
also detected. Rye and spelt samples contained trace amounts of di-unsaturated 
alkenylresorcinols which eluted slightly earlier than the respective monounsaturated 
and saturated homologues (Figure S2a). Furthermore, traces of even-chain 
alkylresorcinols (e.g. AR-20 or AR-22) were frequently detected in the samples, eluting 
exactly between the more abundant odd-chain AR homologues (Figure S2b). These 
compounds have not been reported in cereals before but have very recently been 
detected by Ross et al. in quinoa (Ross, Svelander, Karlsson, & Savolainen, 2017). In 
light of the results from this study, they appear not be restricted to this pseudocereal 
but are likely more widely distributed. Finally, methyl-alkylresorcinols (mAR), which 
 
19 
 
feature an additional methyl group on the aromatic ring, were detected; these 
compounds have also been detected previously in quinoa (Ross, Svelander, Karlsson, 
& Savolainen, 2017). The mass spectra of these compounds featured a base ion at 
m/z 282.1472 instead of m/z 268.1315 (i.e. shifted by the mass corresponding to one 
methylene group compared to ARs). The mAR eluted slightly later than the respective 
AR isomers with the same alkyl chain and could be identified through the presence of 
m/z 282.1472 and the respective molecular ion (Figure S2b-d). Various mAR 
homologues from mAR-19 to mAR-27 could be identified in spelt, bread wheat, barley 
and emmer, but not in rye, einkorn and oats (which was very low in alkylresorcinols in 
general). The detection of these compounds in several of the cereal samples (although 
at minute concentrations) means that the use of these compounds as specific markers 
for quinoa or – in human plasma – for dietary quinoa intake should be treated with 
caution. 
 
3.5 Analytical discrimination of bread wheat, spelt, einkorn, emmer, barley, rye 
and oats by Principle Component Analysis  
The lipids and their intensities obtained from the data mining workflow (section 
2.7) for most samples (including analytical duplicates from extraction and GC-MS) 
were compared by PCA . Some samples of bread wheat, barley, emmer and einkorn 
had been analysed under slightly different conditions and had to be excluded from the 
PCA (see Table S1, supporting information). With the PCA based on all mass features 
a good separation of the lipid classes was achieved, particularly when PC1 was plotted 
against PC3 (Figure S3, supporting information), but a slight overlap between cereals 
(particularly emmer and einkorn) was observed. However, this separation could be 
 
20 
 
significantly improved by applying a Random Forest algorithm to identify the most 
diagnostic mass features. PCA analysis of a dataset reduced to the 25 most impactful 
classifiers showed a full separation of all seven cereal classes (Figure 4). The first two 
principle components accounted for 64.7% and 15.8% of total variance, respectively. 
Rye samples were separated from the other cereals by strongly negative scores in 
PC1, followed by spelt samples (slightly negative). Oats samples were clearly 
separated from the other cereals by their strong positive scores in PC1, while bread 
wheat samples featured clearly more negative scores in PC2 than the other cereals. 
Einkorn, emmer and barley samples plotted more closely together, but were fully 
separated by slight differences in both PC1 and PC2 It has to be noted here, that our 
samples included a high proportion of local landraces, which exhibit higher genetic 
diversity than modern, inter-bred cereal varieties (Villa, Maxted, Scholten, & Ford-
Lloyd, 2005). This diversity is likely expressed in a higher variation in their lipid patterns 
and therefore in relatively high intra-group variation. The Loadings Plot supported the 
findings described in the prior results sections (Figure S4, supporting information). 
Alkylresorcinols (red circles) were found to have predominantly negative loadings on 
PC1 and PC2, which explains the strongly negative values of rye (high in ARs) 
samples in PC1 and positive values of oats (low in ARs in both PC1 and PC2. The 
most negative loading on PC2 was found for a mass feature corresponding to AR-17, 
and the higher proportions of AR17 in bread wheat compared to barley, emmer, and 
einkorn explained the separation of these groups on PC2 
A second cluster of compounds (blue circles) in the loadings plot was found 
with slightly positive loadings on PC1 and mostly slightly negative loadings on PC2. 
These mass features were found to correspond to triacylglycerols in the samples. In 
addition to ARs and triacylglycerols, there were few compounds (green circles) which 
 
21 
 
could not readily be identified, but their corresponding mass spectra tentatively 
suggested the presence of at least one carbohydrate moiety in their structure. 
Ziegler et al. reported an analytical separation of Triticum ssp. by PCA based 
on relative AR distribution, and were able to achieve a separation of einkorn (diploid) 
from emmer and durum wheat (both tetraploid) and spelt and bread wheat (both 
hexaploid), but the two hexaploid wheats were not separable (Ziegler, Steingass, 
Longin, Würschum, Carle, & Schweiggert, 2015). Righetti et al. achieved a separation 
of einkorn, emmer, and spelt as well as durum and bread wheat by PCA based on 
non-targeted lipid profiles acquired by high resolution LC-MS (Righetti, Rubert, 
Galaverna, Folloni, Ranieri, Stranska-Zachariasova, et al., 2016; Righetti, Rubert, 
Galaverna, Hurkova, Dall'Asta, Hajslova, et al., 2018). As far as can be ascertained, 
this study is the first to successfully discriminate seven cereals, including four closely 
related Triticum species, based on their lipid profiles. Based on this, GC/Q-TOF MS-
based lipid profiling could be used as an authenticity tool to distinguish cereal flours 
or guide the selection of specific marker compounds and derived methods to be used 
to detect mixtures. 
 
3.6 Limitations of the approach 
One drawback of our GC-based approach is the exclusion of polar lipids such 
as glycerophospholipids or digalactosyldiacylglycerols, which represent important lipid 
classes in cereals (Geng, Harnly, & Chen, 2015; Morrison, 1988). The analysis of 
these compounds can be achieved by LC-MS, but this technique has inherent caveats 
due to vastly different ionisation efficiencies of different analytes depending both on 
ionisation technique (e.g. APCI or ESI) and polarity (positive or negative). In reference 
 
22 
 
experiments, LC-MS with ESI in positive mode was found to be very useful for the 
analysis of phospholipids, but alkylresorcinols were not detectable using this approach 
and required use of APCI or negative ionisation ESI (Knödler, Berardini, Kammerer, 
Carle, & Schieber, 2007; Righetti, et al., 2016). Accordingly, lipid profiling by LC-MS 
is not straightforward; both GC- and LC-based methods have their individual 
advantages and weaknesses. 
Compared with analytical approaches employing targeted sample preparation 
steps, the approach used in this study could be slightly less sensitive because 
dominant lipids (mostly TAGs) do not allow the same concentration factor for analysis. 
Our instrumental limit of detection was about 1 pg on column (corresponding to about 
50 ng/g cereal) for alkylresorcinols and free sterols, but slightly higher for later eluting 
compounds such as the late eluting C54 TAGs (20 pg and 1 µg/g cereal, respectively). 
Accordingly, we were only able to detect major compounds in the conjugated sterol 
fraction (typically conjugates of sitosterol and campesterol), whilst other studies have 
provided a more detailed analysis (Esche, Barnsteiner, Scholz, & Engel, 2012). 
However, this analytical approach enabled individual detection of all these conjugates 
in one analytical run without requiring dedicated sample preparation steps for each of 
these fractions (Breinhölder, Mosca, & Lindner, 2002). Furthermore, novel minor 
constituents of the vitamin E fraction (i.e. tocomonoenols) and minor alkylresorcinols 
(i.e. even-chain ARs and mARs) which had not been described in cereals before were 
detectable using this approach, demonstrating the sensitivity achievable with this non-
targeted approach. 
 
4. Conclusions 
 
23 
 
A new analytical approach for lipid profiling, based on high temperature gas 
chromatography coupled to high resolution mass spectrometry, was successfully 
applied to the analysis of cereal lipids. Whilst gathering analytical data on the several 
hundred compounds of the complete GC-amenable lipidome the method proved to be 
sensitive enough for the detection of nutritionally or analytically important minor 
compounds, such as free and conjugated sterols and alkylresorcinols. Furthermore, 
distinct differences in the distribution in the lipid patterns could be used to discriminate 
all seven cereals by PCA, thus proving the value of this method as authenticity tool. 
The method could be further developed and improved by using compound 
class-specific standards to account for losses during sample preparation and to enable 
quantitative determination of the lipid constituents. This could provide a valid 
alternative to LC-MS based lipid-profiling methods, to be used for other matrices or as 
an addition to an LC-MS assay of polar lipids.  
 
Conflict of interests: 
The authors have no conflicts of interests. 
 
Acknowledgements: 
The authors are grateful to A. Bogaard (University of Oxford, UK), F. Longin (University 
of Hohenheim, Germany), the Max Rubner Institute (Detmold, Germany), the John 
Innes Centre (Norwich, UK), and the Leibniz Institute of Plant Genetics and Crop Plant 
Research (IPK, Gatersleben, Germany) for cereal samples. S.H. and L.J.E.C. were 
supported by the Royal Society (RG150718) and NERC (NE/N011317/1). GC/Q-ToF 
 
24 
 
MS (CC010NERC capital grant awarded to IDB) analyses were performed at the 
NERC Life Sciences Mass Spectrometry Facility (Bristol Node). The authors thank the 
Natural Environment Research Council, UK for partial funding of the mass 
spectrometry facilities at Bristol (Contract No. R8/H10/63; http://www.lsmsf.co.uk). 
 
  
 
25 
 
References 
Abidi, S. (2001). Chromatographic analysis of plant sterols in foods and vegetable oils. Journal of 
Chromatography A, 935(1-2), 173-201. 
Andersson, A. A., Kamal-Eldin, A., & Åman, P. (2010). Effects of environment and variety on 
alkylresorcinols in wheat in the HEALTHGRAIN diversity screen. Journal of Agricultural and 
Food Chemistry, 58(17), 9299-9305. 
Breinhölder, P., Mosca, L., & Lindner, W. (2002). Concept of sequential analysis of free and conjugated 
phytosterols in different plant matrices. Journal of Chromatography B, 777(1-2), 67-82. 
Butinar, B., Bucar-Miklavcic, M., Mariani, C., & Raspor, P. (2011). New vitamin E isomers (gamma-
tocomonoenol and alpha-tocomonoenol) in seeds, roasted seeds and roasted seed oil from 
the Slovenian pumpkin variety 'Slovenska golica'. Food Chemistry, 128(2), 505-512. 
Cert, A., Moreda, W., & Pérez-Camino, M. (2000). Chromatographic analysis of minor constituents in 
vegetable oils. Journal of Chromatography A, 881(1-2), 131-148. 
Chambers, M. C., Maclean, B., Burke, R., Amodei, D., Ruderman, D. L., Neumann, S., Gatto, L., Fischer, 
B., Pratt, B., & Egertson, J. (2012). A cross-platform toolkit for mass spectrometry and 
proteomics. Nature Biotechnology, 30(10), 918. 
Chong, J., Soufan, O., Li, C., Caraus, I., Li, S., Bourque, G., Wishart, D. S., & Xia, J. (2018). MetaboAnalyst 
4.0: towards more transparent and integrative metabolomics analysis. Nucleic Acids Research. 
Esche, R., Barnsteiner, A., Scholz, B., & Engel, K.-H. (2012). Simultaneous analysis of free 
phytosterols/phytostanols and intact phytosteryl/phytostanyl fatty acid and phenolic acid 
esters in cereals. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 60(21), 5330-5339. 
Fiorentino, A., Mastellone, C., D’Abrosca, B., Pacifico, S., Scognamiglio, M., Cefarelli, G., Caputo, R., & 
Monaco, P. (2009). δ-Tocomonoenol: A new vitamin E from kiwi (Actinidia chinensis) fruits. 
Food Chemistry, 115(1), 187-192. 
Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations, 2018. Crop Prospects and Food Situation-
No.2 - 06,  http://www.fao.org/giews/reports/crop-prospects/en/, accessed 05.07.2018 
Geng, P., Harnly, J. M., & Chen, P. (2015). Differentiation of Whole Grain from Refined Wheat (T. 
aestivum) Flour Using Lipid Profile of Wheat Bran, Germ, and Endosperm with UHPLC-HRAM 
Mass Spectrometry. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 63(27), 6189-6211. 
Gutiérrez, A., & del Río, J. C. (2001). Gas chromatography/mass spectrometry demonstration of steryl 
glycosides in eucalypt wood, kraft pulp and process liquids. Rapid Communications in Mass 
Spectrometry, 15(24), 2515-2520. 
Hammann, S., & Cramp, L. J. E. (2018). Towards the detection of dietary cereal processing through 
absorbed lipid biomarkers in archaeological pottery. Journal of Archaeological Science, 93, 74-
81. 
Hengtrakul, P., Lorenz, K., & Mathias, M. (1991). Alkylresorcinol homologs in cereal grains. Journal of 
Food Composition and Analysis, 4(1), 52-57. 
Horler, R. S. P., Turner, A. S., Fretter, P., & Ambrose, M. (2018). SeedStor: A Germplasm Information 
Management System and Public Database. Plant and Cell Physiology, 59(1), e5-e5. 
Janssen, H. G., de Koning, S., & Brinkman, U. A. (2004). On-line LC-GC and comprehensive two-
dimensional LCxGC-ToF MS for the analysis of complex samples. Analytical and Bioanalytical 
Chemistry, 378(8), 1944-1947. 
Knödler, M., Berardini, N., Kammerer, D. R., Carle, R., & Schieber, A. (2007). Characterization of major 
and minor alk(en)ylresorcinols from mango (Mangifera indica L.) peels by high-performance 
liquid chromatography/atmospheric pressure chemical ionization mass spectrometry. Rapid 
Communications in Mass Spectrometry, 21(6), 945-951. 
Landberg, R., Kamal-Eldin, A., Salmenkallio-Marttila, M., Rouau, X., & Åman, P. (2008). Localization of 
alkylresorcinols in wheat, rye and barley kernels. Journal of Cereal Science, 48(2), 401-406. 
McKevith, B. (2004). Nutritional aspects of cereals. Nutrition Bulletin, 29(2), 111-142. 
Morrison, W. R. (1988). Lipids in cereal starches: A review. Journal of Cereal Science, 8(1), 1-15. 
 
26 
 
Müller, M., Hammann, S., & Vetter, W. (2018). Countercurrent chromatographic isolation and 
purification of 11'-alpha-tocomonoenol from the vitamin E extract of palm oil. Food Chemistry, 
256, 327-332. 
Nyström, L., Moreau, R. A., Lampi, A.-M., Hicks, K. B., & Piironen, V. (2008). Enzymatic hydrolysis of 
steryl ferulates and steryl glycosides. European Food Research and Technology, 227(3), 727. 
Panfili, G., Fratianni, A., & Irano, M. (2003). Normal Phase High-Performance Liquid Chromatography 
Method for the Determination of Tocopherols and Tocotrienols in Cereals. Journal of 
Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 51(14), 3940-3944. 
Perkowski, J., Buśko, M., Stuper, K., Kostecki, M., Matysiak, A., & Szwajkowska-Michałek, L. (2008). 
Concentration of ergosterol in small-grained naturally contaminated and inoculated cereals. 
Biologia, 63(4), 542-547. 
Piironen, V., Toivo, J., & Lampi, A.-M. (2002). Plant sterols in cereals and cereal products. Cereal 
Chemistry, 79(1), 148-154. 
Pluskal, T., Castillo, S., Villar-Briones, A., & Orešič, M. (2010). MZmine 2: modular framework for 
processing, visualizing, and analyzing mass spectrometry-based molecular profile data. BMC 
Bioinformatics, 11(1), 395. 
Prinsen, P., Gutierrez, A., Faulds, C. B., & del Rio, J. C. (2014). Comprehensive study of valuable 
lipophilic phytochemicals in wheat bran. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 62(7), 
1664-1673. 
Purcaro, G., Barp, L., Beccaria, M., & Conte, L. S. (2016). Characterisation of minor components in 
vegetable oil by comprehensive gas chromatography with dual detection. Food Chemistry, 
212, 730-738. 
Righetti, L., Rubert, J., Galaverna, G., Folloni, S., Ranieri, R., Stranska-Zachariasova, M., Hajslova, J., & 
Dall’Asta, C. (2016). Characterization and discrimination of ancient grains: a metabolomics 
approach. International Journal of Molecular Sciences, 17(8), 1217. 
Righetti, L., Rubert, J., Galaverna, G., Hurkova, K., Dall'Asta, C., Hajslova, J., & Stranska-Zachariasova, 
M. (2018). A novel approach based on untargeted lipidomics reveals differences in the lipid 
pattern among durum and common wheat. Food Chemistry, 240, 775-783. 
Ross, A. B., Åman, P., Andersson, R., & Kamal-Eldin, A. (2004). Chromatographic analysis of 
alkylresorcinols and their metabolites. Journal of Chromatography A, 1054(1-2), 157-164. 
Ross, A. B., Kamal-Eldin, A., Jung, C., Shepherd, M. J., & Åman, P. (2001). Gas chromatographic analysis 
of alkylresorcinols in rye (Secale cerealeL) grains. Journal of the Science of Food and 
Agriculture, 81(14), 1405-1411. 
Ross, A. B., Shepherd, M. J., Schüpphaus, M., Sinclair, V., Alfaro, B., Kamal-Eldin, A., & Åman, P. (2003). 
Alkylresorcinols in cereals and cereal products. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 
51(14), 4111-4118. 
Ross, A. B., Svelander, C., Karlsson, G., & Savolainen, O. I. (2017). Identification and quantification of 
even and odd chained 5-n alkylresorcinols, branched chain-alkylresorcinols and 
methylalkylresorcinols in Quinoa (Chenopodium quinoa). Food Chemistry, 220, 344-351. 
Ruiz-Gutierrez, V., & Perez-Camino, M. (2000). Update on solid-phase extraction for the analysis of 
lipid classes and related compounds. Journal of Chromatography A, 885(1-2), 321-341. 
Rupérez, F. J., Martıń, D., Herrera, E., & Barbas, C. (2001). Chromatographic analysis of α-tocopherol 
and related compounds in various matrices. Journal of Chromatography A, 935(1), 45-69. 
Ryynänen, M., Lampi, A.-M., Salo-Väänänen, P., Ollilainen, V., & Piironen, V. (2004). A small-scale 
sample preparation method with HPLC analysis for determination of tocopherols and 
tocotrienols in cereals. Journal of Food Composition and Analysis, 17(6), 749-765. 
Suzuki, Y., Esumi, Y., Uramoto, M., Kono, Y., & Sakurai, A. (1997). Structural analyses of carbon chains 
in 5-alk (en) ylresorcinols of rye and wheat whole flour by tandem mass spectrometry. 
Bioscience, Biotechnology, and Biochemistry, 61(3), 480-486. 
 
27 
 
Varga, M., Bartók, T., & Mesterházy, Á. (2006). Determination of ergosterol in Fusarium-infected 
wheat by liquid chromatography–atmospheric pressure photoionization mass spectrometry. 
Journal of Chromatography A, 1103(2), 278-283. 
Villa, T. C. C., Maxted, N., Scholten, M., & Ford-Lloyd, B. (2005). Defining and identifying crop 
landraces. Plant Genetic Resources, 3(3), 373-384. 
Żarnowski, R., Suzuki, Y., Yamaguchi, I., & Pietr, S. J. (2002). Alkylresorcinols in barley (Hordeum 
vulgare L. distichon) grains. Zeitschrift für Naturforschung C, 57(1-2), 57-62. 
Ziegler, J. U., Steingass, C. B., Longin, C. F. H., Würschum, T., Carle, R., & Schweiggert, R. M. (2015). 
Alkylresorcinol composition allows the differentiation of Triticum spp. having different 
degrees of ploidy. Journal of Cereal Science, 65, 244-251. 
 
  
 
28 
 
 
Captions to Figures: 
Figure 1: Structures of a) sitosterol, b) sitosteryl palmitate, c) stigmastanyl ferulate, d) 
sitosteryl glucoside, e) α-tocopherol, f) α-tocomonoenol, g) α-tocotrienol, and h) 5-n-
nonadecyl resorcinol (AR-19). 
 
Figure 2: a) GC/Q-TOF MS chromatogram of a representative lipid extract, after 
trimethylsilylation, showing the elution of fatty acids, alkylresorcinols, tocols, free and 
conjugated sterols as well as diacylglycerols (DAGs) and finally triacylglycerols 
(TAGs). Peaks marked with asterisks are internal standards. b): Partial extracted ion 
chromatograms of m/z 396.3756 (black), m/z 397.3834 (red), m/z 382.3600 (orange), 
and m/z 383.3678 (blue) showing the elution of free sterols as well as steryl glycosides 
and C16 and C18 fatty acid esters. c): Partial extracted ion chromatograms showing the 
elution of β/γ-tocopherol (T, m/z 488.4050, dark blue), β/γ-tocomonoenol (T1, m/z 
486.3894, green), β/γ-tocotrienol (T3, m/z 482.3581, red), α-tocopherol (m/z 
502.4206, black), α-tocomonoenol (m/z 500.4050 orange), and α-tocotrienol (m/z 
496.3737, light blue). The peaks marked with a plus are sitosterol and stigmastanol.  
 
Figure 3: Partial extracted ion chromatograms of m/z 268.1315 showing the elution of 
the major alkylresorcinols and alkenylresorcinols with chain lengths from 15–27 
carbons in representative samples of rye, bread wheat, spelt, einkorn, emmer, barley 
and oats. Please note: Individual chromatograms were slightly shifted on the x axis (≤ 
0.2 min) to account for retention time shifts from column maintenance.  
 
29 
 
 
. 
Figure 4: Score plot of the Principal Component Analysis of the cereal samples 
(including duplicates) based on a reduced feature list showing the separation of bread 
wheat (green), einkorn (blue), emmer (turquoise), spelt (grey), barley (red), rye 
(yellow) and oats (pink). A Random Forest classification algorithm (Metaboanalyst) 
was applied to the total lipid profiles extracted from the samples and the 25 most 
impactful features were selected for the reduced feature list. 
 
