This is an Open Access document downloaded from ORCA, Cardiff University's institutional
repository: http://orca.cf.ac.uk/99998/
This is the author’s version of a work that was submitted to / accepted for publication.
Citation for final published version:
Keller, Andrew N., Eckle, Sidonia B. G., Xu, Weijun, Liu, Ligong, Hughes, Victoria A., Mak,
Jeffrey Y. W., Meehan, Bronwyn S., Pediongco, Troi, Birkinshaw, Richard W., Chen, Zhenjun,
Wang, Huimeng, D'Souza, Criselle, Kjer-Nielsen, Lars, Gherardin, Nicholas A., Godfrey, Dale I.,
Kostenko, Lyudmila, Corbett, Alexandra J., Purcell, Anthony W., Fairlie, David P., McCluskey,
James and Rossjohn, Jamie 2017. Drugs and drug-like molecules can modulate the function of
mucosal-associated invariant T cells. Nature Immunology 18 (4) , pp. 402-411. 10.1038/ni.3679 file 
Publishers page: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/ni.3679 <http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/ni.3679>
Please note: 
Changes made as a result of publishing processes such as copy-editing, formatting and page
numbers may not be reflected in this version. For the definitive version of this publication, please
refer to the published source. You are advised to consult the publisher’s version if you wish to cite
this paper.
This version is being made available in accordance with publisher policies. See 
http://orca.cf.ac.uk/policies.html for usage policies. Copyright and moral rights for publications
made available in ORCA are retained by the copyright holders.
 1 
Drugs and drug-like molecules can modulate mucosal-associated invariant T cell 
function 
 
Andrew N. Keller1,2*, Sidonia B.G. Eckle3*, Weijun Xu4,5*, Ligong Liu4,5, Victoria A. Hughes1,2, Jeffrey 
Y.W. Mak4,5, Bronwyn Meehan3, Troi Pediongco3, Richard W. Birkinshaw1, Zhenjun Chen3, Huimeng 
Wang3, Criselle D’Souza3, Lars Kjer-Nielsen3, Nicholas A. Gherardin3,6, Dale I. Godfrey3,6, Lyudmila 
Kostenko3, Alexandra J. Corbett3, Anthony W. Purcell1, David P. Fairlie 4,5#, James McCluskey3# & Jamie 
Rossjohn1,2,7#   
 
1Infection and Immunity Program and Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Biomedicine 
Discovery Institute, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia 
2ARC Centre of Excellence in Advanced Molecular Imaging, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 
3800, Australia 
3Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, 
University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia 
4Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland 4072, 
Australia.  
5ARC Centre of Excellence in Advanced Molecular Imaging, University of Queensland, Brisbane, 
Queensland 4072, Australia.  
6Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence for Advanced Molecular Imaging, University of 
Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia 
7Institute of Infection and Immunity, Cardiff University School of Medicine, Heath Park, Cardiff CF14 
4XN, UK 
 
* joint first authors 
# joint senior and corresponding authors. E-mail: Jamie.rossjohn@monash.edu, 
jamesm1@unimelb.edu.au, d.fairlie@imb.uq.edu.au 
 
 
Running title: MAIT cells, drugs and drug-like molecules   
 2 
 
Abstract 
MR1 can present MAIT cell activating and non-activating vitamin B-based ligands. Whether MR1 
binds other ligands is unknown. Here we identify a range of small organic molecules, drugs, drug 
metabolites and drug-like molecules, including salicylates and diclofenac, as MR1-binding ligands.  
Some of these ligands inhibited MAIT cells ex vivo and in vivo, while others, including diclofenac 
metabolites, were agonists. Crystal structures of a MAIT TCR complexed with MR1 bound to the 
non-stimulatory and stimulatory compounds showed distinct ligand orientations and contacts 
within MR1, highlighting versatility of the MR1 binding pocket. The findings indicate that MR1 
can capture chemically diverse structures, spanning mono- and bicyclic compounds, which either 
inhibit or activate MAIT cells. This demonstrates that drugs and drug-like molecules can have the 
previously unknown property of modulating MAIT cell function in mammals. 
 
Introduction 
In humans, the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) locus is highly polymorphic, thereby enabling HLA 
molecules to present a broad array of peptide antigens (Ags), an essential requirement for protective 
immunity. Conversely, certain HLA allotypes are often associated with aberrant T cell reactivity, 
including autoimmunity, food and drug-linked hypersensitivities1, 2. For example, the anti-retroviral drug 
abacavir binds to HLA-B*57:01 and alters the repertoire of bound peptides, leading to abacavir 
hypersensitivity syndrome3. Humans also possess an array of monomorphic Ag-presenting molecules 
that play distinct and specialised roles in immunity4. Namely, the CD1 family is well suited to bind lipid-
based Ags5, while the MHC class I-related molecule, MR1, presents microbial products associated with 
vitamin B2 synthesis for recognition by mucosal-associated invariant T (MAIT) cells 6. Whether MR1 
or CD1 can present small molecule drugs or drug-like molecules to induce an immune response remains 
unclear, with such potential implications being magnified by the monomorphic nature of these Ag-
presenting molecules. 
 
MAIT cells are an evolutionary conserved innate-like T cell subset that is found in many mammals7, 8.  
Although the function of MAIT cells is emerging, they are considered to play key roles in immunity9 10, 
11
. MAIT cells are abundant in humans, representing up to 10% of the total T cell population in the blood.  
They are found concentrated at mucosal sites, and can account for up to 45% of the total T cell population 
in the liver, a major detoxifying organ that is directly linked to the gastrointestinal system 12. Unlike 
MHC-restricted T cell receptors (TCRs) that typically display a diverse repertoire, MAIT cells mostly 
 3 
express a TCR that possesses an ‘invariant’ TCR -chain (TRAV1-2-TRAJ33/20/12) paired with a 
limited array of TCR -chains8, 13, 14. MR1 can present stimulatory and non-stimulatory pyrimidines 
associated with vitamins B2 and B9, respectively, for MAIT cell surveillance. For example, some uracils 
and lumazines derived from riboflavin biosynthesis activate MAIT cells, whereas derivatives of folic 
acid, including 6-formylpterin (6-FP), are non-stimulatory ligands15, 16. A key difference between these 
stimulatory and non-stimulatory antigens is that the former possess a ribityl chain that mediates contacts 
with the MAIT TCR17. Upon activation via the MAIT TCR, MAIT cells rapidly secrete an array of pro-
inflammatory cytokines, proliferate and have the capacity to kill bacterially infected cells18, 19. It is 
therefore important to understand the range of ligands that can modulate MAIT cell function.  
 
Using parallel in silico discovery approaches, we identified potential MR1-binding ligands, including 
some commonly prescribed drugs and drug-like molecules, and other simple aromatic aldehydes, 
ketones, carboxylates and analogues, pyrimidines, quinones and flavones. Further, we evaluated these 
ligands for their ability to modulate MAIT cell function through their interaction with MR1. We found 
that some caused MR1 cell surface upregulation and inhibited MAIT cell activation, while others 
activated MAIT cells. Consequently, we demonstrate that MR1 can capture chemically diverse scaffolds. 
These observations indicate that some drugs and drug-like molecules impact MAIT cell function. 
 
Results 
In silico prospecting for MR1 ligands   
Our previous studies identified uracil analogues including 5-(2-oxopropylideneamino)-6-D-
ribitylaminouracil (5-OP-RU) and pterin/pteridine analogues like 6-formylpterin (6-FP) as agonists and 
inhibitors, respectively, of MAIT cell activation15. These compounds contain simple pyrimidine 
heterocycles as scaffolds, suggesting that the ligand-binding site of MR1 (the A´-pocket) has a propensity 
to bind small molecules, possibly including drugs, drug-like molecules or fragments. Here, the A´-pocket 
of MR1 features an unusual Schiff base-forming Lys43, sitting at the base of an aromatic cradle within 
MR1 that is ideal for accommodating aromatic ligands, and a network of polar sidechains (e.g. Arg9, 
Ser24, Arg94) that can interact with both a uracil and a ribityl chain16.  
To identify other chemical scaffolds capable of binding to MR1, we conducted multiple in silico screens 
in parallel using different chemical libraries, including 6,000 in-house organic compounds and 1,216 
FDA approved drugs from the Distributed Structure-Searchable Toxicity (DSSTox) database to target 
the A´-pocket (Figure 1). Based on MR1-binding by the most active known MAIT cell antigen (5-OP-
 4 
RU), we performed fragment-based virtual screening of the 6,000 compound library to identify small 
aromatic aldehydes or carboxylates that might neutralize Lys43, as well as simple pyrimidines, quinones 
and enones (Fig. 1a), to bind at the same site as 5-OP-RU (Fig. 1b). This led to 147 hits, including those 
shown (Fig. 1c). Additionally, a database of 1,216 FDA approved drugs was screened in silico (Fig. 1d) 
for shapes matching to the ligands 6-FP (Fig. 1e) and 5-OP-RU (Supplementary Figure 1a), leading to 
16 virtual hits including those shown (Fig. 1f). A third in silico approach involved receptor-based virtual 
docking (Fig. 1g) of a subset of 470 of 1,216 FDA approved drugs (MW 150-300 Da) into the ternary 
crystal structure of 5-OP-RU bound MR1-MAIT TCR (Fig. 1h and Supplementary Figure 1b & c). 
This led to identification of 20 virtual hits, including those shown (Fig. 1i). In summary, these parallel 
approaches (Figure 1) produced 183 distinct hits with chemically diverse structures (Supplementary 
Tables 1 and 2), suggesting that MR1 has the potential to bind to many structurally different compounds. 
 
Diverse MR1 ligands can inhibit or activate MAIT cells 
Using in vitro functional assays, we evaluated 81 of these in silico hits for their ability to bind to MR1 
and to stimulate MAIT cells. We hypothesized that some might be like 5-OP-RU, binding to MR1 and 
activating MAIT cells; others might be like Ac-6-FP and 6-FP, binding MR1 but not activating MAIT 
and acting as competitive inhibitors of MAIT cell stimulation by 5-OP-RU. MR1 binding and stimulatory 
capacity of the compounds were assessed in experiments whereby an antigen presenting cell line 
overexpressing MR1 (C1R.MR1) and a T cell line overexpressing a MAIT TCR (Jurkat.MAIT-A-F7, 
TRBV6-1 TCR) were co-incubated with the test compound. MR1 binding was measured by increased 
MR1 cell surface expression on C1R.MR1 cells. Stimulatory capacity was measured by increased CD69 
surface expression on Jurkat.MAIT-A-F7 cells. As summarized (Supplementary Table 3, Figure 2a 
and Supplementary Figure 2a), approximately a quarter of the compounds had a measurable effect on 
MR1 upregulation and/or MAIT cell stimulation, including 9 drugs, 5 flavones and 8 small molecule 
compounds (Supplementary Figure 3). Of the 16 compounds that upregulated MR1, 8 were agonists 
(Supplementary Figure 2a) (Figure 2a). Thus, whilst MR1 can bind to diverse chemical ligands 
(Supplementary Figure 3), the requirements relating to MAIT cell activation were more stringent. 
Notably, many of the aromatic aldehydes/ketones/carboxylic acids (Figure 1a and Supplementary 
Tables 1–3) that fitted into MR1 did not upregulate MR1 cell surface expression appreciably, indicating 
that simply neutralizing Lys43 through either Schiff-base formation or an ionic interaction was 
insufficient for MR1 binding and that other binding components were also required. 
 
 5 
We then compared 6-FP and Ac-6-FP with a selection of the compounds that strongly upregulated MR1, 
but were not agonists, for their MR1 binding and inhibitory capacity. These included the drug related 
compounds 3-formylsalicylic acid (3-F-SA), 5-formylsalicylic acid (5-F-SA) and 2-hydroxy-1-
naphtaldehyde (2-OH-1-NA) (Figure 2b). Kinetics and levels of MR1 upregulation of these three 
compounds were similar as compared to 6-FP (Figure 2c, Supplementary Figure 2b). 3-F-SA and 2-
OH-1-NA also effectively inhibited MAIT cell activation in the presence of 5-OP-RU in a dose-
dependent manner, as judged by CD69 upregulation assays with three Jurkat.MAIT cell lines 
(Jurkat.MAIT-A-F7, Jurkat.MAIT-#6 and Jurkat.MAIT-C-F7) (Figure 2d and Supplementary Figure 
2c). As judged by half maximum inhibitory concentrations (IC50) across the range of 5-OP-RU doses 
tested (Supplementary Table 4), we established that Ac-6-FP was the most potent inhibitor, followed 
by 3-F-SA and 6-FP which were comparable in their ability to inhibit MAIT activation, with 2-OH-1-
NA being the least potent inhibitor. A similar pattern was observed for IL-2 production by a mouse MAIT 
TCR transduced BW58 cell line (BW58.CD3.MAIT-V8.2) (Figure 2e and Supplementary Figure 2d, 
Supplementary Table 4 for IC50 values). Notably CD69 upregulation by the T cell lines in response to 
phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA)/Ionomycin stimulation was not impaired in the presence of these 
inhibitors (Supplementary Figure 2e); similarly simulation of a conventional T cell line by its cognate 
Ag was not impaired (Supplementary Figure 2e) thus indicating that the inhibitory effects were specific 
to the MAIT-MR1 axis. 
 
Interestingly, the fine specificity underpinning Jurkat.MAIT cell activation and inhibition towards 
chemically similar structures was evident when comparing 3-F-SA and 5-F-SA. Namely, while 3-F-SA 
did not stimulate any of the three Jurkat.MAIT-TCR cell lines, 5-F-SA showed modest activation of 
Jurkat.MAIT-#6 (TRBV6-4) that was blocked by anti-MR1 26.5, but 5-F-SA did not activate 
Jurkat.MAIT-A-F7 (TRBV6-1) or Jurkat.MAIT-C-F7 (TRBV20, not shown) (Figure 2f), indicating that 
MAIT TCR -chain usage can fine tune the responsiveness to certain ligands. 
 
A drug degradation product binds and upregulates MR1    
The antifolates, aminopterin and its closely related derivative chemotherapeutic methotrexate, are used 
to treat certain cancers and autoimmune disorders, including rheumatoid arthritis and psoriasis20. 
Aminopterin readily photodegrades in UV light to form 2,4-diamino-6-formylpteridine (2,4-DA-6-FP). 
While methotrexate is more stable, it nevertheless forms the same photodegradation product 21. Given 
the similarity between the naturally occurring photodegradation products, 6-FP and 2,4-DA-6-FP 
 6 
(Supplementary Figure 4a), we reasoned that the latter molecule might also upregulate MR1 cell 
surface expression. Indeed, photodegradation preparations of aminopterin sponsored MR1 refolding and 
upregulated MR1 cell surface expression, while untreated aminopterin did not (Supplementary Figure 
4b-d).   Mass spectrometry analysis comparing the captured antigen with synthetically produced 
compound, showed that 2,4-DA-6-FP was captured within the refolded MR1 molecule (Supplementary 
Figure 4e).  Collectively, these studies indicated that the metabolite 2,4-DA-6-FP is a novel MR1 ligand, 
subsequently confirmed by structural studies (see below). 
 
Diclofenac metabolites can activate MAIT cells 
We also characterized an agonistic drug identified from the functional screen, diclofenac (DCF), a 
commonly prescribed non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug. Whilst not apparently upregulating MR1, 
DCF activated Jurkat.MAIT-A-F7 cells, with this activation being blocked by the anti-MR1 monoclonal 
antibody 26.5 and competitively inhibited by Ac-6-FP in a dose dependent manner (Figure 3a). The 
level of stimulation reached at 100 M ligand concentration was approximately 2-fold greater than that 
of the ribityllumazine agonists, 6,7-dimethyl-8-D-ribityllumazine (RL-6,7-DiMe) and 7-hydroxy-6-
methyl-8-D-ribityllumazine (RL-6-Me-7-OH)16 and comparable to maximum stimulation levels reached 
with 5-OP-RU, albeit at a 1 x 106 fold lower concentration (Figure 3a). Interestingly, while DCF 
activated Jurkat.MAIT cells expressing the A-F7 MAIT TCR (using TRBV6-1), it did not activate two 
other Jurkat.MAIT cell lines (#6, and C-F7), expressing TRBV6-4 or TRBV20 TCR -chain segments, 
indicating that the agonistic properties of DCF are dependent on the TCR -chain (Figure 3b) suggestive 
of MAIT cell subset specific activation. Moreover, 5-OP-RU activation of Jurkat.MAIT-A-F7 cells was 
increased in the presence of DCF, and DCF did not inhibit 5-OP-RU activation of Jurkat.MAIT-#6 and 
Jurkat.MAIT-C-F7 cells (Figure 3c).  
 
To understand if DCF was broadly stimulatory to MAIT cells we tested a panel of 12 cell lines expressing 
MR1 restricted TCRs 13, 22 that varied in TCR - and -chain usage as well as reactivity to 5-OP-RU, 6-
FP, Ac-6-FP and absence of ligand to DCF in the presence of C1R.MR1 cells (Figure 3d and 
Supplementary Figure 5). Given that DCF is known to be metabolised, we tested if the observed 
stimulation was due to DCF itself or three of its hydroxyl metabolites (4-hydroxy, 5-hydroxy, 4,5-
dihydroxy diclofenac) and two glucuronide conjugates (diclofenac acyl-β-D-glucuronide and diclofenac 
acyl-β-D-glucuronide allyl ester) (Figure 3d-e). Importantly DCF and its metabolites did not modulate 
stimulation of a conventional T cell line by its cognate Ag (Supplementary Figure 5b) assuring 
 7 
specificity of the observed responses. Of the cell lines tested, the A-F7 TCR was specifically stimulated 
by DCF. Interestingly, for this cell line stimulation by 5-OH-DCF was stronger than DCF itself. 
Similarly, 10 other of the 12 cell lines tested responded modestly to 4-OH-DCF whilst none of the other 
DCF metabolites yielded specifically increased responses.  DCF responsive cell lines included two 
(MAV36 and MAV21) that expressed atypical TRAV1-2- MR1-restricted TCRs, suggesting that 
recognition of these metabolites extends beyond classical MAIT cells.  Collectively, these results 
indicated that observed MAIT cell activation by DCF might be more attributable to one of its metabolites.  
 
MR1 cell surface presentation of drugs and drug-like molecules  
Given that many drugs are metabolized within cells, we next asked whether some of the compounds that 
inhibited or activated MAIT cells had been metabolized in antigen-presenting cells (APCs) before being 
presented by MR1 at the cell surface. To establish this, we immunoprecipitated MR1 from the surface of 
C1R.MR1 cells and conducted mass spectrometry analyses of the ligands captured by MR1. To validate 
this approach, we incubated the C1R.MR1 cells with Ac-6-FP, and specifically detected this ligand in 
the MR1 eluate fraction (Figure 3f). Using this approach, we also determined that 3-F-SA was presented 
by MR1 on the cell surface (Figure 3f). Next, we established that it was DCF metabolites, and not DCF 
itself, that were presented on the cell surface. Namely, metabolites of DCF bound to MR1 on the cell 
surface included hydroxylated DCF (either 5-OH-DCF, 4’-OH-DCF, which are indistinguishable via 
mass spectrometry, or a combination of the two) and 4’,5-diOH-DCF, which was subsequently confirmed 
by mass spectrometric analyses of the pure, chemically synthesized DCF metabolites (Figure 3f). DCF 
and the glucuronated species were not detected, which could be due to cell type specific metabolism or 
the larger size of glucuronated DCF that no longer fits the ligand-binding pocket of MR1. Accordingly, 
drugs, drug-like molecules as well as their metabolites can be presented by MR1 to MAIT cells. 
 
Ex vivo modulation of MAIT cell activity  
Next, we established the extent to which three of these newly identified MR1 ligands (3-F-SA, 5-F-SA, 
2-OH-1-NA, and controls, 6-FP and Ac-6-FP) could modulate MAIT cell activity ex vivo. MAIT cells, 
identified as MR1-5-OP-RU tetramer+ TRAV1-2+ lymphocytes within the CD3+ population of PBMCs 
from five donors, were examined for the competitive inhibition of the drugs and drug-like molecules on 
5-OP-RU dependent MAIT cell activation, assaying for TNF and IFN cytokine production as activation 
markers (Figure 4a).  The compounds inhibited MAIT cell activation in a dose-dependent manner, with 
Ac-6-FP representing the most potent competitive inhibitor, followed by 3-F-SA. Less potent inhibitor 
 8 
effects were observed for 2-OH-1-NA, 5-F-SA and 6-FP. We also examined the ability of these 
compounds to inhibit MAIT cell proliferation when incubated with 5-OP-RU. The pattern of inhibitory 
effects on cytokine production mirrored the inhibitory effects on cell proliferation (Figure 4b). 
Importantly, MAIT cells and TRAV1-2+ non-MAIT cells produced cytokine in response to 
PMA/Ionomycin stimulus (Supplementary Figure 6a) and proliferated in response to plate bound CD3-
CD28 stimulus (Supplementary Figure 6b) regardless of the presence of inhibitory molecules, 
indicating that toxicity is unlikely to simulate inhibition. Accordingly, drugs and drug-like molecules can 
impact on MAIT cell activity ex vivo.   
 
In vivo modulation of MAIT cell activity  
Further, we next established the efficacy of two of these ligands to inhibit MAIT cell proliferation in vivo 
using a previously established MAIT cell model in C57BL/6 mice 23. In this model synthetic 5-OP-RU 
in conjunction with TLR stimulus causes MAIT cells to accumulate in the lungs to make up to about 25-
50 % of T cells as compared to 0.5-2 % in the naïve mouse. TLR stimulus can either be provided by 
synthetic TLR agonists such as Pam2Cys (TLR2/6) 24, poly I:C (TLR3), or CpG (TR9) or by bacteria 
deficient in the riboflavin pathway, as we showed for the live-attenuated vaccine strain of Salmonella 
enterica serovar Typhimurium, S. Typhimurium BRD509, deficient in riboflavin synthesis 
(Salm.BRD509ΔribDH). 
 
Mimicking a model of infection whereby 5-OP-RU is extracellularly supplied for Ag presentation in 
conjunction with TLR stimulus from the intracellular Salm.BRD509ΔribDH bacteria, repeated 
application of Ac-6-FP or 3-F-SA inhibited MAIT cell accumulation in the lungs in a dose dependent 
manner (Figure 4c). Importantly Ac-6-FP or 3-F-SA had no impact on bacterial CFU counts, absolute 
numbers of non-MAIT  T cells and IL-17 production by non-MAIT  T cells in the lungs in response 
to Salm.BRD509ΔribDH (Supplementary Figure 7), indicating that the inhibitory effects were not due 
to toxic effects by the inhibitors on bacteria or T cells. Accordingly, these inhibitors can effectively 
abrogate MAIT cell activation in vivo. 
 
Structures of MAIT TCR-MR1-ligand complexes 
We sought to determine how these drugs, their derivatives, and drug-related compounds could be 
accommodated within the MR1 binding pocket and modulate MAIT cell activity.  Accordingly, we 
 9 
stimulatory ligands (2,4-DA-6-FP; 2-hydroxy-5-methoxybenzaldehyde (HMB); 2-OH-1-NA; and 3-F-
SA) and two activating ligands (DCF and 5-OH-DCF) to high resolution (Supplementary Table 5).  All 
drugs and drug-related compounds were clearly visible within the MR1-Ag-binding cleft 
(Supplementary Figure 8), thereby permitting detailed atomic insight into the mechanism underpinning 
their effect on the MAIT-MR1 axis. The MAIT TCR docked atop the six MR1-drug/drug-like complexes 
with a very similar topology (Supplementary Figures 8g & 9).  Here, the root mean square deviation, 
the buried surface area (BSA) values and relative contributions of the CDR loops between the complexes 
were very similar (Supplementary Table 6 & Supplementary Figure 9). Thus recognition of diverse 
chemical scaffolds does not translate to diverse MAIT TCR-MR1 docking, thereby underscoring the 
innate-like recognition properties of the MAIT TCR. Further, all of the drugs and drug-like molecules 
were located within the A´-pocket of MR1 (Figures 5 and 6), which not only validates the in silico 
approaches (Figure 1 & Supplementary Figure 10), but formally demonstrates that this pocket is 
sufficiently versatile to accommodate distinct chemical identities. All of these non-stimulatory ligands 
formed a Schiff base with Lys43 at the base of the aromatic cradle (Figures 5a-e), and, consistent with 
their non-stimulatory properties, none of them directly contacted the MAIT TCR. 2,4-DA-6-FP was 
located in essentially an identical position as 6-FP (Figures 5a & b), where the pteridine ring of 2,4-DA-
6-FP was sandwiched between Tyr7 and Trp69, and formed additional aromatic pi-interactions with 
Trp156 and Tyr62, whilst abutting Ile96 (Figure 5b). The difference between 6-FP and 2,4-DA-6-FP is 
the presence of a carbonyl group in the former versus an amino group in the latter at position-4 of the 
pteridine ring. This difference impacts at the base of the cleft, with either the carbonyl or amino group 
nestling against Arg9 in the MR1-6-FP complex (Figures 5a & b). The latter interaction is unfavourable 
and likely accounts for weaker MR1 upregulation (Supplementary Figure 4b & c). Accordingly, subtle 
chemical differences between ligands can impact on the associated MR1-binding properties.   
 
The compound 2-OH-1-NA, like 6-FP, possesses a bicyclic ring structure, and while the planes of the 
aromatic rings are similarly disposed, 2-OH-1-NA is displaced by ≈ 4Å towards the 1-helix of MR1 
(Figure 5c).  In adopting this binding mode, its 2-hydroxy group, the only polar moiety of 2-OH-1-NA, 
hydrogen bonds to His58, and packs against Tyr162, while the interactions with Arg9, Arg94, and Trp69 
are lost (Figure 5c). 3-F-SA and HMB are monocyclic (Figures 5d & e), with the latter compound being 
directly superposable over 2-OH-1-NA, thereby mediating similar interactions with MR1, including the 
hydrogen bond with His58 (Figures 5d, e & f). The 5-methoxy group is not involved in polar 
interactions, but is stabilized by packing against Tyr7 (Figures 5d). In contrast, 3-F-SA is rotated in the 
same plane by approximately 70° around the Schiff base in comparison to 2-OH-1-NA, and accordingly 
 10 
is accommodated in a different region of the A´-pocket of MR1 (Figure 5e).  Namely, the carboxyl group 
of 3-F-SA leaned over to salt bridge with Arg9 and hydrogen bond to Ser24, while its aromatic ring is 
wedged between Tyr7 and Trp69 (Figure 5e). These additional interactions are consistent with 3-F-SA 
representing a potent inhibitor of MAIT cell function (Figure 2c). Accordingly, there is sufficient 
plasticity within the A´-pocket of MR1 to accommodate diverse chemical scaffolds. 
 
MAIT TCR-MR1-stimulatory ligand complexes 
DCF stimulated Jurkat.MAIT cells in an apparent subset specific manner (Figure 3), but its stimulatory 
activity appeared attributable to its metabolites, including 5-OH-DCF and 4’-OH-DCF (Figure 3f). 
Comparing the crystal structures of the MAIT TCR bound to MR1 presenting DCF and 5-OH-DCF 
provided insight into the agonist properties of 5-OH-DCF (Figures 6a-f, Supplementary Tables 7 & 
8).  Neither species formed a Schiff base with MR1 (Figures 6d & e), consistent with the poor ability of 
DCF (and metabolites thereof) to upregulate MR1, and reminiscent of the weak agonist RL-6-Me-7-OH 
that also did not form a Schiff base with MR117.  Despite this, the positioning of Lys43 remained 
relatively well fixed within the MR1 cleft, forming a hydrogen bond with the adjacent His58 (Figures 
6d & e). In contrast to the non-stimulatory compounds, DCF directly contacted the MAIT TCR (Figure 
6d). However, the mode of DCF binding within the cleft, and subsequent contacts of DCF and MR1 with 
the MAIT TCR, were markedly different to the MAIT TCR-MR1-5-OP-RU interactions (Figures 6c, d 
& e). The plane of the central phenylacetic acid ring of DCF was essentially perpendicular to that of 5-
OP-RU and all other MR1-ligand complexes (Figures 6c, d & f). Moreover, due to the flexibility in the 
primary amine linker of DCF, the dichlorophenyl and phenylacetic acid rings were positioned 
approximately orthogonal to each other (Figure 6a). Here, the dichlorophenyl group was buried towards 
the base of the cleft, wedged between Tyr7, Tyr62, Trp156 and Trp164 (Figure 6a). One of the chloro 
groups pointed towards Arg94, whereas the other was shielded by Tyr62 and Trp164 and formed a 
halogen bond with Lys43 (Figure 6a). The phenylacetic acid group is sandwiched between Arg9 and 
Tyr62, with the acetic acid moiety salt-bridging to Arg9 and forming a hydrogen bond with Ser24 
(Figure 6a). Notably, to accommodate the dichlorophenyl ring of DCF within the cleft, MR1 underwent 
some conformational changes, including a slight reorientation of Tyr7, and, most notably, Trp69 flipping 
out of the way to avoid steric clashes with the ligand (Figures 6c & d). The reconfiguration of Trp69 
had a knock-on effect in that it caused a remodeling of the CDR3 loop of the MAIT TCR, with Glu99 
swinging down to salt bridge with Arg9 and Arg94, while Trp96 re-orientated to form novel contacts 
with Met72 and Trp69 of MR1 (Figures 6c & d). The hydroxyl moiety of Tyr95 from the CDR3 loop 
 11 
was shown to play a pivotal role in interacting with the ribityl chain of 5-OP-RU (Figure 6c), but did not 
mediate contacts with DCF. Instead, the Tyr95 aromatic ring stacked against the phenylacetic acid ring, 
the latter also forming van der Waals contacts with Glu99 from the CDR3 loop (Figure 6d). The mode 
of binding of DCF was very similar to that of 5-OH DCF, with one notable difference. Namely, the 5-
OH group of 5-OH-DCF formed a hydrogen bond with Glu99 from the CDR3 loop, and this additional 
contact to the TCR correlated with its agonist properties and with its ability to stimulate a specific MAIT 
TCR (Figure 6e).  
 
Discussion 
MR1 presents small molecules derived from vitamin B2 and B9 syntheses to MAIT cells 6. To enable 
this, the architecture of the MR1 antigen-binding cleft is distinct from that of MHC-I and CD1 
molecules16.  Namely, the groove of MR1 possesses a constricted A´-pocket, rich in aromatic residues 
that sequesters the vitamin B-related ligands, and also shelters a lysine residue at its base that can 
covalently bind to an antigen via Schiff base formation.  A central question in the emerging field of 
metabolite-mediated immunity is whether MR1 could present ligands distinct from the riboflavin 
precursors and folic acid derived metabolites.  Here we show that MR1 can present a heterogeneous array 
of organic compounds with diverse chemical scaffolds, including some commonly prescribed 
therapeutics, which can modulate MAIT cell activity.  
 
Given that pyrimidines are a widely used scaffold in therapeutics, we hypothesized that MR1 could 
present drugs and drug-like molecules to MAIT cells.  Our targeted in silico analyses of the MR1 A´- 
pocket indicated this to be the case, and this was subsequently confirmed through a series of in vitro, ex 
vivo and in vivo assays. These MR1 binding compounds included a wide range of drugs and drug-like 
molecules, fragments and derivatives.  Naturally, the ensuing functional and structural studies mostly 
focused on those ligands that most markedly impacted on MAIT cell function in vitro and paves the way 
for further functional and clinical investigations into how other compounds including drugs identified 
here can affect the function of the MAIT-MR1 axis. Our findings also have important implications for 
any future MAIT cell inhibitor-based therapy, as it demonstrates that administration of MR1 inhibitory 
ligands can impact on MAIT cell function in an in vivo setting, as judged by the infection model tested 
here.  Indeed, this is the first description of any such in vivo modulation of MAIT cells.  Clearly however, 
it would be of value to test the ability of drugs and drug like molecules to impact on MAIT cell function 
 12 
using other mouse infection models.  Our work also suggests that if endogenous ligands possess similar 
chemical scaffolds, they may too impact on MAIT cell function. 
  
Although a diverse array of compounds was found to upregulate MR1 cell surface expression, the number 
of compounds that were able to stimulate MAIT cells was more limited, indicating greater restrictions 
on the structures of ligands that could both bind to MR1 and subsequently productively engage with the 
MAIT TCR.  Of the ligands that were found to upregulate MR1 cell surface expression, all formed a 
Schiff base with MR1, underscoring the importance of forming a covalent adduct. This may be important 
for capturing MR1 within the cell and enabling its egress to the cell surface25.  Moreover, the various 
non-stimulatory ligands adopted different conformations and contacts within the A´-pocket of MR1, 
which also correlated with their differential ability to upregulate MR1 and inhibit MAIT cell activation.  
For example, 3-F-SA formed additional salt-bridging interactions within the MR1 cleft, thereby 
accounting for its greater capacity to upregulate MR1 and its greater inhibitory potential. Notably, while 
3-F-SA was non-stimulatory against the MAIT TCRs tested, 5-F-SA could weakly activate a MAIT TCR 
expressing cell line, indicating that subtle structural changes in the ligand, coupled with MAIT TCR 
heterogeneity, may lead to unanticipated MAIT cell activation. This resonates with the recent finding 
that diversity in the MAIT TCR repertoire can permit some folic acid derivatives to stimulate some MR1-
restricted T cells and MAIT cells22.   
 
Of the drugs tested that activated MAIT cells, diclofenac showed the greatest potency.  Its stimulatory 
activity was traced to naturally occurring DCF metabolites presented by MR1 on the cell surface.  The 
mode of binding of DCF within the MR1 cleft was distinct from that of other MR1 bound ligands, not 
forming a Schiff base with Lys43, as also observed for some ribityllumazines17.  Crucially, the 5-OH-
DCF metabolite directly contacted the MAIT TCR  and -chains, which provided insight into both its 
antigenicity and the ability of various DCF metabolites to activate specific MAIT TCRs22, suggesting 
MAIT cell subset specific activation by DCF metabolites. 
 
An important consideration, beyond the scope of this conceptual study, is whether the prescribed drugs 
that modulate MAIT cell activity manifest clinically in significant side effects. While the degree to which 
methotrexate and aminopterin degrade to 2,4-DA-6-FP in patients is unclear, high dose chemotherapeutic 
administration of methotrexate can result in much higher plasma concentrations of the drug than what is 
required to upregulate MR1 26. In addition, we speculate that MR1 tetramers loaded with 2,4-DA-6-FP 
may bind some MAIT cells, consistent with the presence of some MR1 reactive T-cells recognising 6-
 13 
FP22. Thus, patients administered with continual low-dose methotrexate during their treatment for 
rheumatoid arthritis,27 other autoimmune diseases and cancers, are also continually exposed to low levels 
of 2,4-DA-6-FP. In contrast, our observations with DCF potentially reconcile reported immunological 
complications, such as severe hepatotoxicity. Indeed, DCF could activate a MAIT TCR at a concentration 
achievable in patients after an oral dose 28. Interestingly, pharmacogenetic studies have reveled that DCF 
hepatotoxicity is much more prevalent in patients with polymorphisms in the enzymes responsible for 
DCF catabolism - including CYP2C8, which is responsible for conversion of DCF to 5-OH-DCF 29. This 
is especially relevant when considering the liver, which contains both an inordinately high number of 
MAIT cells and high levels of DCF metabolism. 
 
This is the first description in nature of drugs impacting on the function of MR1, a monomorphic Ag-
presenting molecule. Unlike HLA-linked drug hypersensitivities where a drug can exert its effect by 
altering the repertoire of peptides bound by the HLA allomorph30, the more constricted nature of the 
MR1 binding pocket limits binding to either the drug or a ligand associated with vitamin B2 synthesis 
but not both.  Some of the compounds studied here, including salicylates, diclofenac, methotrexate and 
aminopterin, have long been known to elicit diverse pharmacological responses and hypersensitivities 
not completely understood in relation to targets attributed to the mechanisms of action.27 Our findings 
here suggest a possible link between such drugs or their metabolites and MAIT cell function, and indicate 
a possible link between common drug (e.g. salicylate) intolerance 31 and modulation of MAIT cell 
activity. Future work could address clinical relevance of our observations and may call for the 
development of novel approaches to examine drug-mediated effects on MAIT cell activity in humans. 
 
In summary, we have demonstrated that MR1 can interact with a heterogeneous array of small organic 
molecules, including some commonly prescribed human therapeutics. These interactions can positively 
or negatively modulate MAIT cell activity, thereby suggesting previously unknown immunomodulating 
properties of certain drugs, metabolites and small organic compounds. 
 
 
Acknowledgements 
We thank the staff at the National Synchrotron for assistance with data collection and staff at the Monash 
Macromolecular crystallization facility. We thank T. Hansen (University of Washington) and W.J. 
Yankelevich (US Food and Drug Administration) for the gift of the 26.5 hybridoma. S.E was supported 
by an Early Career Research Award from The University of Melbourne. This work was supported by the 
 14 
Australian National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC) and Australian Research Council 
(ARC, CE140100011). N.A.G is a Victorian Cancer Council postdoctoral fellow, J.R. is an NHMRC 
Australia Fellow (AF50), D.I.G and D.P.F. are NHMRC Senior Principal Research Fellows (1020770 
and 1027369), A.W.P. and NHMRC Senior Research Fellow. 
 
 
Materials and Methods 
In silico virtual screening 
Fragment-, shape- and receptor-based virtual screening was performed. In fragment-based screening, an 
in-house chemical database (~6,000 compounds) was searched for pyrimidines, enones, quinones, 
chromones (for example, flavones and isoflavones), as well as aromatic aldehydes, carboxylic acids and 
their derivatives that could potentially neutralize Lys43 through Schiff base formation or ionic contacts, 
respectively. This search yielded 147 virtual hits, including three FDA approved drugs (Coumarin, 
Thioguanine, Benzbromarone). In shape-based screening, ROCS (v 3.1.2, OpenEye Scientific Software 
Inc., Santa Fe, NM, http://www.eyesopen.com) 32 and Maestro Shape Screen (v 9.4, Schrödinger, NY) 
were used to search for analogous shapes to 6-FP from 1,216 FDA approved drugs 
(FDAMDD_v3b_1216_15Feb2008.sdf from http://www.epa.gov/ncct/dsstox/ DataFiles.html). 2D 
coordinates of 1216 drugs were converted to 3D structures with LigPrep (Schrödinger v 9.4). 16 virtual 
hits were obtained after visual inspection of the top 100 drugs (Combo score, ROCS; shape similarity 
score, Maestro), two of which were also identified in fragment-based screening (Coumarin and 
Thioguanine). In addition, Maestro Shape Screen was used to search for analogous shapes to 5-OP-RU 
from the same drug database (Supplementary Figure 1a). In receptor-based structure screening, GOLD 
(v 5.1) and Glide (v 9.4) were used to dock a pre-filtered subset of 470 of 1,216 drugs (150 < MW < 300 
Da) into the 5-OP-RU binding site of the MR1-MAIT TCR crystal structure (PDB: 4NQC). Docked 
ligand poses were scored with ChemPLP, Chemscore and ASPscore in GOLD. Before the virtual screen, 
5-OP-RU was re-docked into MR1 to reproduce its binding pose from the crystal structure and to identify 
scoring functions best able to predict the crystal pose (Supplementary Figure 1c). The structure PDB: 
4NQD (MR1 K43A) was chosen for re-docking 5-OP-RU as there was no covalent bond to MR1. For 
the virtual screen, the active site was defined by a 10 Å radius around Arg9 and a rigid MR1 conformation 
was used for ligand docking. The top scoring 200 drugs were analyzed by visual inspection for ligand-
protein interactions simulated from docking. To increase the hit rate, another docking programme, Glide, 
was also used in Standard Precision docking mode to score ligand binding using GScore. The active site 
 15 
was the same for Glide and GOLD docking. In total 20 drug hits were selected for screening, one of 
which was also identified via fragment-based screening (Thioguanine). 
 
Aminopterin photodegredation 
Aminopterin powder (Sigma-Aldrich) was dissolved in phosphate-buffered saline (pH 8.5) at a 
concentration of 0.5mg/ml and exposed to light produced by a 2 x 38W fluorescent lamps at a distance 
of 40cm at room temperature. The degree of photodegradation was monitored using the method 
previously described 33, whereby the absorbance spectrum was analysed over 230-480nm using a 
PHERAstar plate reader (BMG labtech). The photodegradation reaction was deemed near-complete after 
48h, which was subsequently confirmed by HPLC analysis against undegraded sample (not shown). The 
effect of degraded aminopterin on MR1 surface expression of C1R.MR1 cells was performed as 
described previously 34 using biotinylated 26.5 mAb and streptavidin-PE. Cells were treated for 3h prior 
to staining, flow cytometry analysis was carried out using a CyAn ADP (Beckman Coulter) and produced 
data analysed using FlowJo v10.1. 
 
Compounds tested in cellular assays in vitro and ex vivo 
6-FP and Ac-6-FP (Schircks Laboratories) were dissolved at 5 mM in water, supplemented with 17 mM 
NaOH. 5-OP-RU (as 1.52 mM stock solution in DMSO), was used by dilution in PBS to the required 
concentration immediately before testing (DMSO content was less than 0.01 % in final media). All other 
compounds were obtained commercially (Sigma-Aldrich, Fluka, Sapphire Bioscience) or synthesized in 
house and dissolved at 50 mM in DMSO. All compounds were diluted in PBS. For inhibitory compounds, 
vehicle controls (V) were prepared: V1 of ligands prepared at 5 mM in water supplemented with 17 mM 
NaOH, V2 of ligands prepared at 50 mM in DMSO.   
   
Cell lines, PBMCs and monocyte derived dendritic cells 
All cells were cultured in RPMI medium supplemented with 10 % fetal calf serum and serum complement 
(RF10 medium). Clonal C1R cells overexpressing MR1 (CIR.MR1)35 or HLA-B*08:01 36 have been 
described previously and were derived from C1R (ATCC number CRL-1993), a human B 
lymphoblastoid cell line (LCL). Clonal Jurkat.MAIT cells expressing the TRBV6-1 A-F7 MAIT TCR 
(Jurkat.MAIT-A-F7), the TRBV6-4 #6 MAIT TCR (Jurkat.MAIT-#6) or the TRBV20 C-F7 MAIT TCR 
(Jurkat.MAIT-CF7) 15 or the LC13 TCR and CD8 (Jurkat.CD8.LC13) 36 have been described 
previously and were derived from the human T cell line Jurkat RT3-T3.5 cells (Jurkat; ATCC number 
T1B-153). Clonal Jurkat76.MAIT-A-F715, bulk sorted Jurkat76.CD3.MAV21, Jurkat76.CD3.MAV36, 
 16 
Jurkat76.CD3.MBV2822 have been described previously and were derived from the human T cell line 
Jurkat7637. Bulk sorted SKW-3.M12-64 and SKW-3.M20-6422 have been described previously and were 
derived from the human T cell line SKW-3 (DSMZ accession code ACC 53). For the generation of 
Bw58.CD3.MAIT-V8.2, sequential retroviral transductions with CD3 genes and TCR genes were 
performed as described previously38. Briefly full-length CD3 genes (CD3 -, -,  and -chains) were 
designed, purchased and cloned into a self-cleaving 2A peptide-based (MSCV)-IRES-GFP (pMIG) 
vector39. After sequence verification, murine CD3 genes were transduced into the TCR-deficient Bw58 
cells. GFP-high expressing cells (Bw58.CD3) were cloned by single cell FACS. Similarly full length 
MAIT TCR genes of a V8.2 TCR derived from a TCR transgenic mouse using the canonical V19i 
(V19i C-/-)40 and the endogenous paring TCR -chain (TRBV13-2*01 (Arden nomenclature V8.2), 
TRBJ2-3*01, CDR3 CASGDAKLGVGAETLYF)) were cloned into pMIG vector, the sequence 
verified and then transduced into Bw58.CD3 cells to generate Bw58.CD3.MAIT-V8.2. Similarly bulk 
sorted Jurkat.76.CD3.AM1, Jurkat.76.CD3.AM2, Jurkat.76.CD3.AM3 and bulk sorted SKW-3.M33-20 
were generated based on TCR sequences described previously22. For the generation of high-level MR1 
expressing Ag presenting cells (M12.C3.MR1), the same retroviral system was used. M12.C3 cells (an 
MHC-II deficient B-lymphoblastoid cell line) were transduced with murine MR1 (pMIG-MR1) and 
clones were generated by single cell FACS.  PBMCs were isolated from whole blood of healthy donors 
and stored in liquid nitrogen (authorized by the Australian Red Blood Cross Service Material Supply 
Agreement with The University of Melbourne) as described previously13. Monocyte derived dendritic 
cells (mDCs) were generated from PBMCs by incubating plastic adherent PBMCs for 5 days in RF10 
media supplemented with 300 U/ml hGM-CSF (Peprotech) and 100 U/ml hIL-4 (Peprotech). Plastic non-
adherent PBMCs were refrozen in liquid nitrogen and thawed out one day prior to addition to mDCs as 
autologous lymphocytes in activation assays. 
Activation of human and murine T cell lines 
Human MR1 reactive T cell lines (105) were tested for activation by co-incubation with vehicle controls, 
PBS/media alone (background) or doses of compounds in the presence of C1R.MR1 cells (105) for 16 h 
in 200 l RF10 medium. To test if inhibitors impact on the ability of the T cell lines to be activated, cells 
were incubated with PMA/Ionomycin (final concentration of 10 ng/ml and 1 g/ml respectively) and the 
highest concentration of inhibitor. In addition a T cell line (Jurkat.CD8.LC13) restricted by a MHC-I 
molecule (HLA-B*08:01) was co-incubated with its cognate peptide FLRGRAYGL (FLR, 1 M) and 
each of the compounds. Cells were subsequently stained with anti-CD3-PE-Cy7 (clone UCHT1, 
eBioscience), and anti-CD69-APC or anti-CD69-PE (clone FN50, BD Biosciences) mAbs as well as 
 17 
anti-CD19-APC-Cy7 (clone SJ25C1, BD Biosciences) in the case of bulk sorted T cell lines (to 
distinguish antigen presenting cells) and 7AAD (BD Biosciences) for 30 min on ice, washed twice with 
FACS wash (2% fetal calf serum in PBS), fixed with FACS fix (2.1% glucose and 1% paraformaldehyde 
in PBS) and data acquired on a BD Canto II or LSR Fortessa flow cytometer and analysed using FlowJo. 
Activation of T cell lines was measured by an increase in surface CD69 expression of CD3+/GFPlow cells 
(clonal T cell lines) or CD3+/CD19- cells (bulk sorted T cell lines) and fold of background MFI CD69 
was calculated. 
 
Jurkat76.MAIT-A-F7 or Bw58.CD3.MAIT-V8.2 cells (105) were tested for activation by co-incubation 
with vehicle controls, PBS/media (background), doses of compounds and C1R.MR1 cells or 
M12.C3.MR1 cells (105) for 24 h in 200 l RF10 medium. To test if inhibitors do not impact on the 
ability of the T cell lines to produce IL-2, cells were incubated with PMA/Ionomycin (final concentration 
of 10 ng/ml and 1 g/ml respectively) and the highest concentration of inhibitor. IL-2 production was 
measured as a mean of T cell activation in ELISA (human: BD Biosciences OptEIA kit, mouse: anti-IL-
2 mAb (clone JES6-1A12, BD Biosciences)) using 100 µl of supernatant, frozen/thawed to kill cells. In 
brief, IL-2 was assayed with biotinylated anti–IL-2 mAb and o-Phenylenediamine dihydrochloride 
(OPD; Sigma-Aldrich) substrate conversion by HRP-Streptavidin detected at 492 nm emission and IL-2 
concentrations calculated based on IL-2 standards. For inhibition, inhibiting compounds were added to 
Ag presenting cells for 15 min before addition of 5-OP-RU and T cells. For MR1 blocking, 26.5 mAb or 
isotype control mAb were added at 20 g/ml for 1 h to APCs prior to addition of T cells. 
To determine half maximum inhibition by inhibitory compounds (IC50), background activation levels 
were subtracted, data normalized, inhibitor concentrations transformed to log and non-linear regression 
of log (inhibitor) versus the normalized response determined using Prism software. 
 
All cell lines tested negative for mycoplasma. Whilst SKW-3 cells are listed on the database of cross-
contaminated or misidentified cell lines, where they are described as being contaminated with the KE-
37 line, we have transfected specific TCR genes into these cells, which we then recloned and/or enriched 
by iterative cell sorting for TCR expression. Following these steps the cells were then validated for Ag 
recognition of cognate antigens in activation experiments. 
 
Detection of up-regulation of MR1 on the cell surface 
 18 
C1R.MR1 cells (105) were incubated with vehicle controls, PBS/media (background), and 100 M of 
compounds for times as indicated in 200 l RF10 medium per well. Then cells were stained with 
biotinylated anti-MR1 mAb 26.5 41 or biotinylated isotype control on ice for 30 min, washed twice with 
FACS wash, and then stained with Streptavidin-PE (BD Biosciences) and 7AAD (BD Biosciences) on 
ice for 30 min, washed twice again, FACS fixed and data acquired on a BD LSR Fortessa flow cytometer 
and analysed using FlowJo. MR1 upregulation was measured by an increase in 26.5 staining of GFPhigh 
cells (C1R.MR1) and fold of background MFI 26.5 was calculated. 
 
Cellular screening of compounds for MR1 upregulation and Jurkat.MAIT cell activation 
Sets of drugs and other small molecules were tested in a combined MAIT cell activation/MR1 
upregulation assay whereby C1R.MR1 cells (105) and Jurkat.MAIT-A-F7 cells (105) were co-incubated 
with 100 M and 10 M of each compound as described above. Each time, Jurkat.MAIT-A-F7 activation 
by 10 nM 5-OP-RU and MR1 upregulation by 100 M 6-FP were included as positive controls and PBS 
as background control. Cells were stained first with biotinylated anti-MR1 mAb 26.5, anti-CD3-PE-Cy7 
(clone UCHT1, eBioscience), and anti-CD69-APC (clone FN50, BD Biosciences) on ice for 30 min, 
washed three times with FACS wash, and then stained with Streptavidin-PE (BD Biosciences), 7AAD 
(BD Biosciences) on ice for 30 min, washed twice again, FACS fixed and data acquired on a BD Canto 
II flow cytometer and analysed using FlowJo. To allow for comparison between experiments fold of 
background was normalized as % CD69 upregulation by 10 nM 5-OP-RU or % MR1 upregulation by 
100 M 6-FP equating 100 % and fold of background of 1 equating 0%. Compounds that caused levels 
of Jurkat.MAIT activation/MR1 upregulation of larger than 75% at 100 M and/or 25% at 10 M 
compound were considered as agonistic/stronglyMR1 upregulating and those that caused levels of 
activation/MR1 upregulation of larger than 7.5% and less than 75% at 100 M and/or larger than 7.5 % 
and less than 25% at 10 M compound were considered as weakly agonistic/weakly MR1 upregulating. 
For some of the small molecules tested at 100 M we observed a toxic effect that resulted in cell death 
identified by life-dead stain. In these cases, MR1 upregulation was more pronounced at a lower 
concentration of inhibitor (10 M) than at 100 M, e.g. 5-Hydroxy-1,4-naphtoquinone. Considering 
MR1 upregulation at 10 M as part of the selection criteria in such cases thus allowed to include 
molecules that appeared toxic at 100 M. 
 
Ex vivo activation of human PBMCs assayed by intracellular cytokine staining 
 19 
Per sample to mDCs (105), PBS (background), vehicle controls and doses of inhibitors were added, 
followed after 15 min by PBS or titrating amounts of 5-OP-RU. Then autologous lymphocytes (0.5 x 
106) were added per sample. To test if inhibitors impacted on the ability of cells to produce cytokines, 
autologous non-plastic adherent PBMCs were incubated with PMA/Ionomycin (final concentration of 
100 ng/ml and 10 g/ml respectively) and the highest concentration of inhibitor. Upon incubation for 1 
h, BrefeldinA (final concentration of 10 g/ml) was added and incubation continued for 6 h, then surface 
stained for 20 min at room temperature (Zombie Yellow Fixable Viability Kit (Biolegend); anti-CD3-
PE-CF594 (clone UCHT1, BD Biosciences); anti-TRAV1-2-APC (clone 3C10, Biolegend); human 
MR1-5-OP-RU tetramer, generated as described previously15, followed by adding PFA (final 
concentration of 1%) and a 20 min incubation at RT, washed twice with PBS and stained intracellularly 
(anti-IFN-Fitc (clone 25723.11, BD Biosciences); anti-TNF-Pacific Blue (clone Mab11, Biolegend)) 
in 0.3% Saponin/PBS over night at 4°C. The next day, cells were washed twice in PBS and data was 
acquired using a BD LSR Fortessa flow cytometer and analysed by FlowJo. Percent inhibition was 
calculated as 100-(a/b*100), whereby ‘a’ represents background (% cytokine production/% CTV dilution 
in the presence of inhibitor only) subtracted activation by 5-OP-RU in the presence of an inhibitor and 
‘b’ represents background (% cytokine production/% CTV dilution in the presence of PBS only) 
subtracted activation by 5-OP-RU. 
 
Ex vivo activation of human PBMCs assayed by proliferation 
Autologous lymphocytes and mDCs were stained with CellTrace Violet (Molecular Probes) according 
to the manufacturer’s protocol. Per sample to mDCs (105), PBS (background), vehicle controls and doses 
of inhibitors were added, followed after 15 min by PBS or titrating amounts of 5-OP-RU. Then 
autologous lymphocytes (106 per sample) were added. To test if inhibitors impact on the ability of cells 
to produce cytokines, autologous non-plastic adherent PBMCs were incubated for 48 h with plate-bound 
anti-CD3/anti-CD28 (in house and BD Biosciences) at 10 g/ml and at 2 g/ml and the highest 
concentration of inhibitor in a flat-bottom plate before transfer to a U-shape plate after 48 h. Upon 
incubation of 5 days, samples were stained for 20 min at room temperature (Zombie Yellow Fixable 
Viability Kit (Biolegend)), followed by staining for surface markers as above in the case of ICS. Samples 
were washed twice with FACS wash, fixed and data was acquired using a BD LSR Fortessa flow 
cytometer and analysed by FlowJo. Percent inhibition was calculated as described above in the case of 
ICS. 
 
 20 
Mouse in vivo activation/inhibition of MAIT cell accumulation in the lungs  
Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium BRD509 (Salm.BRD509) has been previously described42. 
Salm.BRD509 harbours deletions in aroA and aroD, resulting in limitation of replication and spread of 
bacteria and has an intact riboflavin synthesis pathway. The BRD509ΔribDH mutant 
(Salm.BRD509ΔribDH), lacking a gene segment containing ribD and ribH, which encode key enzymes 
in the riboflavin synthesis pathway, was constructed by lamda red-recombinase mediated allelic 
replacement followed by transduction using phage P22 as previously described 15. BRD509ΔribDH 
cultures were supplemented with 20 µg/ml riboflavin. Bacteria were cultured at 37 °C statically, in Luria 
Bertani broth (LB) for 16-18 h to log-phase (OD600 0.6-0.9) in the presence of antibiotics (30 g/ml 
Streptomycin, 30 g /ml Kanamycin) and riboflavin (20 g/ml). For the infecting inoculum, bacteria 
were re-inoculated in pre-warmed medium for a further 2-4 h static culture (OD600 0.4-0.6). With the 
estimation that 1 OD600=5x108/ml, sufficient bacteria were washed and diluted in PBS for intranasal 
delivery to C57BL/6 mice. A sample of inoculum was plated onto Luria Agar supplemented with 
antibiotics and riboflavin for verification of bacterial concentration by counting CFU. Mice were bred 
and housed in the Biological Research Facility of the Peter Doherty Institute. Male mice aged 7-8 weeks 
were used in experiments and allocated to different groups at random (block randomization). The 
investigators were blinded to the group allocation when assessing the outcome. All procedures were 
approved by The University of Melbourne Animal Ethics Committee. Mice were intranasally inoculated 
using a total volume of 50 l with Ac-6-FP (5x104 pmol and titrations in PBS/1% DMSO) or 3-F-SA 
(5x105 pmol and titrations in PBS/1% DMSO) at day -2 and day -1 or alternatively with vehicle control 
(PBS/1% DMSO). On day 0, mice were intranasally inoculated with BRD509ΔribDH (2 x 107 cfu) and 
5-OP-RU (3 pmol in PBS of a 14.1 mM stock in DMSO) and/or inhibitory antigens (or vehicle control) 
in 50 µl per nares.  Then on day 1, day 2 and day 4 5-OP-RU and/or inhibitor were intranasally inoculated 
using a total volume of 50 l. All inoculations were performed on anesthetized mice by isoflurane with 
an anaesthetizing machine. At day 7 mice were killed by administration of CO2 and lungs (following 
heart perfusion with 10 ml cold RPMI) were harvested. To prepare single cell suspensions, lungs were 
finely chopped with a scalpel blade and treated with 3 mg/ml collagenase III (Worthington), 1 mg/ml 
DNase and 2% FCS in RPMI for 90 min at 37 °C with gentle shaking. Cells were then filtered (70 µM) 
and washed with FACS wash. Red blood cells were lysed from lung preparations with hypotonic buffer 
TAC (Tris-based Amino Chloride) for 5 min at RT and approximately 1.5×106 cells were filtered (40 
µm) and prepared for staining. To block non-specific staining, cells were incubated with mouse MR1-6-
FP tetramer and anti-Fc receptor (2.4G2) for 15 min at RT. Cells were then incubated at RT for 30 
 21 
minutes with antibodies from BD specific for CD19 (clone 1D3), CD45.2 (clone 104), TCRβ (clone H57-
597) and 7AAD as well as mouse MR1-5-OP-RU tetramer13 in FACS wash. Cells were fixed with 1 % 
PFA/PBS and 25-30 k blank calibration particles (BD) were added to enumerate absolute cell numbers, 
prior to analysis on a BD LSR Fortessa flow cytometer.  
 
For intracellular cytokine staining, Golgi plug (BD Biosciences) was used during all processing steps. 
Cells stimulated with PMA/ionomycin (20 ng ml−1, 1 μg ml−1, respectively) for 4 h at 37 °C were 
included as positive controls alongside non-stimulated samples. Surface staining was performed as 
above, followed by intracellular cytokine staining for IL-17A (clone TC11-18H10, BD Biosciences) 
using the BD Fixation/Permeabilization Kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  Data analysis 
was performed with FlowJo software.  
 
Generation of soluble proteins for crystallography 
Soluble A-F7 MAIT TCR and MR1-2m were folded from inclusion bodies and purified using methods 
based on those described previously 17. MR1, 2m, TCR -chain and TCR -chain were overproduced 
separately as insoluble inclusion bodies in E. coli BL21(DE3) that had been transformed with pET 
plasmid containing gene of interest. Protein overproduction was induced in E. coli cells, cultured in LB 
media that had reached an optical density of 0.5, by the addition a 0.5 M IPTG, and further culturing 
for 4 h at 37°C whilst shaking. Cells were harvested by centrifugation and lysed by resuspending in 1% 
(v/v) Triton-X, 4 mM MgCl2, 10 mM DTT, 1 g/l lysozyme (Sigma-Aldrich) and 0.5 g/l DNase, and 
incubating for 2 h at room temperature. Inclusion bodies were harvested from the lysate by centrifugation, 
before being washed 4 times in 50 mM Tris (pH 8), 0.5% (v/v) Triton-X, 100 mM NaCl and 1 mM 
EDTA, omitting the Triton-X and NaCl from the final wash step. Lastly, the isolated inclusion bodies 
were resuspended in 20 mM Tris (pH 8) 6 M guanidinium, 0.5 mM EDTA and 1 mM DTT. The 
approximate concentration and purity of the isolated inclusion bodies was estimated using SDS-PAGE. 
 
MAIT TCR was refolded by rapidly diluting 63 mg of -chain and 42 mg of -chain as inclusion bodies, 
into 500 ml of 100 mM Tris (pH 8.5), 2 mM EDTA, 0.4 M L-arginine, 5 M urea 0.5 mM oxidised 
glutathione, 5 mM reduced glutathione and 1 mM PMSF. Additionally, MR1-2m bound to the 
compounds, HMB or 3-F-SA was refolded by rapidly diluting 56 mg of MR1 and 26 mg of 2m as 
inclusion bodies, into 400 ml of this same refold buffer described above but with the addition of 5 mg/l 
of the target compound. For 2,4-DA-6-FP, the refold contained 10 mg/ml of aminopterin that had been 
 22 
photodegraded for 18h. All refold samples were stirred for 14 h at 4°C, prior to dialysing three times 
against 15 L of 10 mM Tris (pH 8). Dialysate was passed through Macro-Prep DEAE resin (Biorad) and 
protein was eluted using 10 mM Tris (pH 8) with 400 mM NaCl. Next, the eluate was concentrated down 
to 3 ml and purified by size exclusion chromatography using AKTA purification system and a 
Superdex200 15/60 column (GE Healthcare). Finally, the purified sample was passed over a HiTrap-Q 
HP (GE Healthcare) and eluted in 10mM Tris (pH8) using a gradient of 0 mM to 300mM NaCl over 20 
CV. Purified protein was assessed for purity using SDS-PAGE and concentrations were calculated from 
A280 values measured using a NanoDrop-spectrophotometer (Thermo-fisher). 
 
Crystallisation and structure determination 
Purified MR1-2M-Ag was mixed with purified MAIT TCR in a 1:1 molar ratio and concentrated to a 
final concentration of 5 mg/ml. Samples were crystallised by hanging-drop vapour diffusion by mixing 
protein 1:1 with precipitant consisting of 100 mM BTP (pH 6-6.5), 8-20% (w/v) PEG3350 and 200 mM 
Na-acetate, as established previously 17. Crystals formed over 1-5 days at 21°C. Diffraction data was 
collected at 100K on the Australian synchrotron MX1 and MX2 beamlines, from crystals that had first 
been washed in precipitant solution augmented with 10% (v/v) glycerol for cryo-protection. Measured 
reflections were indexed and integrated using either XDS 43 or imosflm, and scaled and merged using 
aimless 44. Phases were calculated by molecular replacement using PHASER 45, whereby, the MR1 
ternary complex, which had the CDR loops and ligand removed, was used as a search model (PDB ID: 
4L4T 17). Refinement was performed using phenix.refine 46, with the initial refinement rounds including 
simulated annealing, model building was performed with COOT 47, with MolProbity used in validation 
48
. The Grade Web Server was used to generate ligand restraints for all drugs. 
 
For the compounds DCF, 5-OH-DCF and 2-OH-1-NA, which did not refold sufficiently well in vitro 
(data not shown), a ligand-exchange approach was employed to obtain structures of MR1 presenting 
these molecules. Namely, when 6-FP (not shown), DCF, 5-OH-DCF, 2-OH-1-NA was added to the 
MAIT TCR-MR1-Ag protein solution at a concentration of 0.6-2 mM prior to crystallization, the 
resulting crystal structures determined from these crystals revealed the added compound at a high 
occupancy (Supplementary Figure 6). The buried surface area was calculated by the CCP4 
implementation of Areaimol and molecular interactions were determined by the CCP4 implementation 
of CONTACT 44. All molecular graphics were constructed using PyMOL. 
 
Mass spectrometry analyses 
 23 
C1R.MR1 cells (5 x 109) were treated with Ac-6-FP, 3-F-SA or DCF for 3 and 16 hours, after which the 
cells were washed extensively and the cell pellet snap frozen in liquid nitrogen. The plasma membrane 
from treated cells was then isolated using an AbCAM plasma membrane kit (Product number ab65400). 
MR1 was isolated from the plasma membrane fraction by immunoprecipitation using mAb 26.5 coupled 
to protein G-Agarose. MR1 and bound ligands were eluted from the resin by acidification and ligand 
containing fractions were further purified by solid phase extraction using a C18 (Waters) or SAX (Supel 
Co) stationary phase for DCF and 3-F-SA respectively. Components of interest were eluted from 
cartridges with 1 ml of methanol. Eluted components were dried on a SpeedVac dryer (Thermo Electron, 
Waltham, MA). The dried samples were resuspended in 50 μl of water/acetonitrile (95:5) for MS/MS 
analyses. 
 
LC-MSMS for profiling of synthetic standards   
Standards were subjected to chromatographic separations with a micropeptide trap (Grace Scientific) 
connected to an Everest C18 column (50 mm x 1 mm, 5 m, Grace Davison) and a Bruker microQTOF 
mass spectrometer.   The starting mobile phase consisted of 95% water (0.5% acetic acid, 10 mM 
ammonium acetate), and the metabolites were eluted using a linear gradient of 95% water to 85% 
acetonitrile over 25 min at a flow rate of 50µl/min. Mass spectra were collected in positive ionization 
mode by scanning over the range m/z 50 to 500.  
 
Targeted detection of compounds using multiple reaction monitoring (MRM)-MS 
A SCIEX QTRAP 5500 mass spectrometer was used for MRM detection of compounds. 20 µl samples 
were injected and loaded onto a trap column (200 µm×0.5 mm ChromXP C18-CL 3 µm 120 Å) at a flow 
rate of 10 µl/min in 98% buffer A for 10 minutes. For on-line fractionation of samples onto the mass 
spectrometer, samples were eluted from the trap column and over a cHiPLC column (75 µm×15 cm 
ChromXP C18-CL 3 µm 120 Å) at 300 nl/min under the following buffer B (95% acetonitrile, 0.1% 
formic acid in water) gradient conditions: 0–3 min 2–10% B, 3–33 min 10–40% B, 33–36 min 40–80% 
B, 36–38 min hold at 80% B, 38–39 min 80–2% B, followed by equilibration at 2% B until the end of 
the run at 48 min. The QTRAP 5500 was operated in MRM mode in unit resolution for Q1 and Q3, 
coupled to an information-dependent acquisition (IDA) criterion set to trigger an EPI scan (10,000 
Da/sec; rolling CE; unit resolution) following any MRM transition exceeding 500 counts (ignoring the 
triggering MRM transition for 3 seconds thereafter).  
 
 24 
For comparison of DCF from cell surface, transitions were simultaneously monitored in detecting DCF 
Q1 to Q3: m/z 295→250, 4-OH-DCF m/z 312.0→266, 312→230, and 312→194 and 5-OH-
DCF m/z 312→266, 312→230, 4,5-dihydroxy-DCF 327.9→290, 327.9→282, 327.9→246, 
325.7→210. Two transitions were simultaneously monitored in detecting Ac-6-FP 
Q1 to Q3: m/z 234.1→190.1, m/z 234.1→147.1 and 3-F-SA detecting Q1 to Q3: m/z 165.1→120.9 
m/z 165.1→92.9. Data analysis was performed using Analyst v1.5.2.  
 
 
Chemical synthesis 
2,4-DA-6-FP, 4,5-diOH-DCF, and 5-OH-DCF were synthesized as shown in Supplementary Figure 
11. 
  
 25 
Figure Legends 
 
Figure 1. In silico virtual screening for putative MR1 ligands. 
a) Fragment-based in silico virtual screen of an in-house chemical database (6,000 compounds) led to 
selection of 147 compounds relating to fragments of 5-OP-RU. b) Docking simulated binding poses 
(cyan) of selected fragments into MR1 at the binding site of 5-OP-RU. c) Examples of virtual hits from 
the fragment-based screen. d) Shape-based in silico virtual matching of 1,216 FDA approved drugs to 6-
FP as a structural template leading to 16 drugs as virtual hits. e) Superimposition of the drugs on the 
shape of 6-FP. f) Examples of drugs as virtual hits from the shape-based screen. Colours in panel f 
correspond to superimposed structures in panel e. g) Receptor-based virtual screen for identification of 
drug hits as putative MR1-binding ligands. h) Docked poses of 20 virtual hits (cyan) from a subset of the 
pre-filtered FDA 1,216 drug database in the putative MR1-binding site defined by key protein residues 
labeled in yellow and shown as sticks. i) Examples of virtual hits from the receptor-based virtual screen.   
 
Figure 2. Drugs and drug-related molecules cause MR1 upregulation and MAIT cell inhibition 
a) Summary of the ability of drugs and drug-related molecules to upregulate MR1 on the surface of 
C1R.MR1 cells and activate Jurkat.MAIT-A-F7 cells as tested in a functional screen. Ligands of interest 
as part of this study are highlighted in bold font. Supplementary Table 3 displays normalised 
Jurkat.MAIT-A-F7 activation/MR1 upregulation for each ligand assayed in a combined Jurkat.MAIT-
A-F7 activation/C1R.MR1 upregulation assay. b) Chemical structures of MR1 ligands (i) 6-formylpterin 
(6-FP), (ii) acetyl-6-formylpterin, (iii) 2,4-diamino-6-formylpteridine (2,4-DA-6-FP), (iv) 3-
formylsalicylic acid (3-F-SA), (v) 5-formylsalicylic acid (5-F-SA) and (vi) 2-hydroxy-1-napthaldehyde 
(2-OH-1-NA). c) MR1 surface upregulation by C1R.MR1 cells over time in the presence of 100 M 6-
FP, Ac-6-FP, 3-F-SA, and 2-OH-1-NA. Displayed is mean of triplicate samples and SEM (error bars) 
gMFI 26.5 fold of background for one representative of three experiments. d) Drug/small molecule dose 
dependent inhibition of Jurkat.MAIT-A-F7 cells activated by 5-OP-RU in the presence of C1R.MR1 
cells and assayed by flow cytometric staining for CD69 as a marker of activation. Displayed is gMFI 
CD69 fold of background control for one representative of three experiments. e) Drug/small molecule 
dose dependent inhibition of Bw58.CD3.MAIT-V8.2 cells activated by 5-OP-RU in the presence of 
M12.C3.MR1 cells, assayed for IL-2 production as a marker of activation. Displayed is one 
representative of 3 experiments. f) Capacity of 3-F-SA versus 5-F-SA to inhibit or activate Jurkat.MAIT-
A-F7 and Jurkat.MAIT-#6 cells as in (d) Displayed is one representative of 3 experiments. D-f) 5-OP-
RU activation with nil inhibitor/activator was assayed in triplicate displaying mean and SEM (error bars). 
 26 
 
Figure 3. Diclofenac metabolites activate MAIT cell lines in an MR1-dependent manner. 
a) Dose dependent activation of Jurkat76.MAIT-A-F7 cells by diclofenac in comparison to 5-OP-RU, 
RL-6-Me-7-OH, RL-6,7-DiMe, 6-FP, Ac-6-FP as well as competitive inhibition by Ac-6-FP and 26.5 
blockage, assayed for IL-2 production as a marker of activation. Displayed is one representative of 2 
experiments. b) Dose dependent activation of Jurkat.MAIT-A-F7 (TRBV6-1+), Jurkat.MAIT-#6 
(TRBV6-4+) and Jurkat.MAIT-CF7 (TRBV20+) cells by diclofenac in comparison to 5-OP-RU, RL-6-
Me-7-OH, RL-6,7-DiMe, 6-FP, Ac-6-FP assayed for CD69 upregulation as a marker of activation in 
flow cytometry. Displayed is one representative of two experiments. c) Activation of Jurkat.MAIT-A-
F7 (TRBV6-1+), Jurkat.MAIT-#6 (TRBV6-4+) and Jurkat.MAIT-C-F7 (TRBV20+) cells by diclofenac 
(in comparison to Ac-6-FP) in combination with 5-OP-RU assayed for CD69 upregulation as a marker 
of activation in flow cytometry. Displayed is one experiment. d) Dose dependent activation of MAIT 
cell lines by diclofenac and diclofenac metabolites (in comparison to 5-OP-RU) as well as in combination 
with Ac-6-FP and 26.5 blockage assayed for CD69 upregulation as a marker of activation in flow 
cytometry. Displayed is one representative of two experiments. e) Chemical structures of (i) Diclofenac 
(DCF), (ii) 4-Hydroxy-diclofenac (4’-OH-DCF), (iii) 5-Hydroxy-diclofenac (5-OH-DCF), (iv) 4’,5-
Dihydroxy-diclofenac (4’,5-diOH-DCF), (v) Diclofenac Acyl--D-glucuronide, (vi) Diclofenac Acyl--
D-glucuronide allyl ester. e) Top: Extracted ion chromatograms (Q1-Q3 transition) of surface isolated 
ligands (red) and chemically synthesised ligand (black) Ac-6-FP, 3-F-SA, 5-OH-DFC and 4’,5-diOH-
DCF respectively (Note 4’-OH-DCF included in grey for comparison). Bottom: enhanced product ion 
(EPI) spectra of ligands of immunoprecipitated MR1 from the surface of C1R.MR1 cells for Ac-6-FP, 
3-F-SA, 5-OH-DFC and 4’,5-diOH-DCF respectively.  
 
Figure 4. Drugs/Drug-related molecules inhibit MAIT cell activation ex vivo and in vivo 
Dose dependent inhibition of cytokine production (a) or proliferation (b) of human MAIT cells (live, 
CD3+, TRAV1-2+ 5-OP-RU-MR1-tetramer+) ex vivo whereby monocyte derived DCs were co-incubated 
with autologous monocyte depleted PBMCs in the presence of 5-OP-RU and inhibitory ligands.  
Displayed are mean and SEM (error bars) of 5 donors (a and b). For 2-OH-1-NA, proliferative response 
could only be determined at a concentration of 25 M, higher concentrations impaired with the ability to 
be activated by CD3/CD28 plate bound stimulation and with tetramer staining (data not shown). c) 
Inhibitory effect of intranasally administered Ac-6-FP and 3-F-SA (as shown in schematic) on MAIT 
cell accumulation in the lungs of C57BL/6 mice upon 5-OP-RU and Salm.BRD509ΔribDH stimulus as 
 27 
shown in scheme. Displayed are % MAIT cells of  T cells showing mean values +/- SEM as error bars 
of four mice (or three mice if excluded due to technical issues) for one experiment. The experiment was 
performed twice with similar results. 
 
Figure 5. Inhibitors bound within the MR1 cleft.  
A-E) MR1 residues (white) that contact directly 6-FP (A), 2,4-DA-6-FP (B), 2-OH-1-NA (C), HMB (D) 
and 3-F-SA (E), coloured green. F) Superposition of 6-FP (green), 2,4-DA-6-FP (purple), 2-OH-1-NA 
(yellow), HMB (slate) and 3-F-SA (orange) within the MR1 binding cleft. Black and red-dashed lines 
denote hydrogen bonds and salt bridges, respectively. 
 
Figure 6. MAIT TCR-MR1 complexes with diclofenac and a specific metabolite.  
A-B) MR1 residues that contact directly DCF (A) 5-OH-DCF (B). C-E) Interactions between the CDR3 
(yellow) and CDR3 (orange) loops of the A-F7 MAIT TCR, with MR1 presenting 5-OP-RU (C), DCF 
(D) and 5-OH-DCF (E). F) Superimposition of 5-OP-RU (yellow) and DCF (green) bound within MR1. 
Colours and labels consistent with Figure 5 unless otherwise stated. Black, red and yellow-dashed lines 
denote hydrogen bonds, halogen bonds and salt bridges, respectively. 
 
  
 28 
References 
1. Jones EY, Fugger L, Strominger JL, Siebold C. MHC class II proteins and disease: a 
structural perspective. Nat Rev Immunol 2006, 6(4): 271-282. 
 
2. Koning F, Thomas R, Rossjohn J, Toes RE. Coeliac disease and rheumatoid arthritis: similar 
mechanisms, different antigens. Nat Rev Rheumatol 2015, 11(8): 450-461. 
 
3. Illing PT, Vivian JP, Dudek NL, Kostenko L, Chen Z, Bharadwaj M, et al. Immune self-
reactivity triggered by drug-modified HLA-peptide repertoire. Nature 2012, 486: 554-
558. 
 
4. Godfrey DI, Uldrich AP, McCluskey J, Rossjohn J, Moody DB. The burgeoning family of 
unconventional T cells. Nat Immunol 2015, 16(11): 1114-1123. 
 
5. Van Rhijn I, Godfrey DI, Rossjohn J, Moody DB. Lipid and small-molecule display by CD1 
and MR1. Nat Rev Immunol 2015, 15(10): 643-654. 
 
6. Eckle SB, Corbett AJ, Keller AN, Chen Z, Godfrey DI, Liu L, et al. Recognition of Vitamin B 
Precursors and Byproducts by Mucosal Associated Invariant T Cells. J Biol Chem 2015, 
290(51): 30204-30211. 
 
7. Treiner E, Duban L, Bahram S, Radosavljevic M, Wanner V, Tilloy F, et al. Selection of 
evolutionarily conserved mucosal-associated invariant T cells by MR1. Nature 2003, 
422(6928): 164-169. 
 
8. Tilloy F, Treiner E, Park S-H, Garcia C, Lemonnier Fß, de la Salle H, et al. An Invariant T Cell 
Receptor Alpha Chain Defines a Novel TAP-independent Major Histocompatibility 
Complex Class Ib-restricted alpha/beta T Cell Subpopulation in Mammals. The Journal of 
Experimental Medicine 1999, 189(12): 1907-1921. 
 
9. Salio M, Silk JD, Jones EY, Cerundolo V. Biology of CD1- and MR1-restricted T cells. Annu 
Rev Immunol 2014, 32: 323-366. 
 
10. Gold MC, Cerri S, Smyk-Pearson S, Cansler ME, Vogt TM, Delepine J, et al. Human mucosal 
associated invariant T cells detect bacterially infected cells. PLoS Biol 2010, 8(6): 
e1000407. 
 
11. Le Bourhis L, Martin E, Péguillet I, Guihot A, Froux N, Coré M, et al. Antimicrobial activity 
of mucosal-associated invariant T cells. Nature immunology 2010, 11: 701-708. 
 
12. Dusseaux M, Martin E, Serriari N, P√©guillet I, Premel V, Louis D, et al. Human MAIT cells 
are xenobiotic-resistant, tissue-targeted, CD161hi IL-ͳ7‚Äìsecreting T cells. Blood 2011, 
117(4): 1250-1259. 
 
13. Reantragoon R, Corbett AJ, Sakala IG, Gherardin NA, Furness JB, Chen Z, et al. Antigen-
loaded MR1 tetramers define T cell receptor heterogeneity in mucosal-associated 
invariant T cells. J Exp Med 2013, 210(11): 2305-2320. 
 
 29 
14. Lepore M, Kalinichenko A, Colone A, Paleja B, Singhal A, Tschumi A, et al. Parallel T-cell 
cloning and deep sequencing of human MAIT cells reveal stable oligoclonal TCRβ 
repertoire. Nat Commun 2014, 5. 
 
15. Corbett AJ, Eckle SB, Birkinshaw RW, Liu L, Patel O, Mahony J, et al. T-cell activation by 
transitory neo-antigens derived from distinct microbial pathways. Nature 2014, 
509(7500): 361-365. 
 
16. Kjer-Nielsen L, Patel O, Corbett AJ, Le Nours J, Meehan B, Liu L, et al. MR1 presents 
microbial vitamin B metabolites to MAIT cells. Nature 2012, 491(7426): 717-723. 
 
17. Patel O, Kjer-Nielsen L, Le Nours J, Eckle SB, Birkinshaw R, Beddoe T, et al. Recognition of 
vitamin B metabolites by mucosal-associated invariant T cells. Nat Commun 2013, 4: 2142. 
 
18. Ussher JE, Klenerman P, Willberg CB. Mucosal-associated invariant T (MAIT) cells: new 
players in anti-bacterial immunity. Frontiers in Immunology 2014, 5. 
 
19. Kurioka A, Ussher JE, Cosgrove C, Clough C, Fergusson JR, Smith K, et al. MAIT cells are 
licensed through granzyme exchange to kill bacterially sensitized targets. Mucosal 
Immunol 2015, 8(2): 429-440. 
 
20. Hashkes PJ, Becker ML, Cabral DA, Laxer RM, Paller AS, Rabinovich CE, et al. Methotrexate: 
New Uses for an Old Drug. The Journal of Pediatrics 2014, 164(2): 231-236. 
 
21. Chatterji DC, Gallelli JF. Thermal and photolytic decomposition of methotrexate in aqueous 
solutions. Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 1978, 67(4): 526-531. 
 
22. Gherardin NA, Keller AN, Woolley RE, Le Nours J, Ritchie DS, Neeson PJ, et al. Diversity of T 
Cells Restricted by the MHC Class I-Related Molecule MR1 Facilitates Differential Antigen 
Recognition. Immunity 2016, 44(1): 32-45. 
 
23. Chen Z, Wang H, D'Souza C, Sun S, Kostenko L, Eckle SBG, et al. Mucosal-associated 
invariant T-cell activation and accumulation after in vivo infection depends on microbial 
riboflavin synthesis and co-stimulatory signals. Mucosal Immunol 2016. 
 
24. Chua BY, Olson MR, Bedoui S, Sekiya T, Wong CY, Turner SJ, et al. The use of a TLR2 
agonist-based adjuvant for enhancing effector and memory CD8 T-cell responses. 
Immunology and cell biology 2014, 92(4): 377-383. 
 
25. McWilliam HEG, Eckle SBG, Theodossis A, Liu L, Chen Z, Wubben JM, et al. The intracellular 
pathway for the presentation of vitamin B-related antigens by the antigen-presenting 
molecule MR1. Nat Immunol 2016, 17(5): 531-537. 
 
26. Zelcer S, Kellick M, Wexler LH, Shi W, Sankaran M, Lo S, et al. Methotrexate levels and 
outcome in osteosarcoma. Pediatric Blood & Cancer 2005, 44(7): 638-642. 
 
 30 
27. Romão V, Lima A, Bernardes M, Canhão H, Fonseca J. Three decades of low-dose 
methotrexate in rheumatoid arthritis: Can we predict toxicity? Immunologic Research 
2014, 60(2-3): 289-310. 
 
28. Davies NM, Anderson KE. Clinical Pharmacokinetics of Diclofenac. Clinical 
Pharmacokinetics 1997, 33(3): 184-213. 
 
29. Krasniqi V, Dimovski A, Domjanović Iva K, Bilić I, Božina N. How polymorphisms of the 
cytochrome P450 genes affect ibuprofen and diclofenac metabolism and toxicity / Kako polimorfizmi gena citokroma PͶͷͲ utječu na metabolizam i toksičnost ibuprofena i 
diklofenaka.  Archives of Industrial Hygiene and Toxicology; 2016. p. 1. 
 
30. Bharadwaj M, Illing P, Theodossis A, Purcell AW, Rossjohn J, McCluskey J. Drug 
hypersensitivity and human leukocyte antigens of the major histocompatibility complex. 
Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 2012, 52: 401-431. 
 
31. Skypala IJ, Williams M, Reeves L, Meyer R, Venter C. Sensitivity to food additives, vaso-
active amines and salicylates: a review of the evidence. Clin Transl Allergy 2015, 5(1): 34. 
 
32. Hawkins PCD, Skillman AG, Nicholls A. Comparison of Shape-Matching and Docking as 
Virtual Screening Tools. Journal of Medicinal Chemistry 2007, 50(1): 74-82. 
 
33. Fehlner PF, Bencsath A, Lam T, Te Piao K. The photodecomposition of aminopterin. 
Journal of Immunological Methods 1987, 101(1): 141-145. 
 
34. Eckle SB, Birkinshaw RW, Kostenko L, Corbett AJ, McWilliam HE, Reantragoon R, et al. A 
molecular basis underpinning the T cell receptor heterogeneity of mucosal-associated 
invariant T cells. J Exp Med 2014, 211(8): 1585-1600. 
 
35. Reantragoon R, Kjer-Nielsen L, Patel O, Chen Z, Illing PT, Bhati M, et al. Structural insight 
into MR1-mediated recognition of the mucosal associated invariant T cell receptor. The 
Journal of Experimental Medicine 2012, 209(4): 761-774. 
 
36. Gras S, Burrows SR, Kjer-Nielsen L, Clements CS, Liu YC, Sullivan LC, et al. The Shaping of T 
Cell Receptor Recognition by Self-Tolerance. Immunity 2009, 30(2): 193-203. 
 
37. Heemskerk MHM, Hoogeboom M, de Paus RA, Kester MGD, van der Hoorn MAWG, Goulmy 
E, et al. Redirection of antileukemic reactivity of peripheral T lymphocytes using gene 
transfer of minor histocompatibility antigen HA-2-specific T-cell receptor complexes 
expressing a conserved alpha joining region. Blood 2003, 102(10): 3530-3540. 
 
38. Gras S, Chen Z, Miles JJ, Liu YC, Bell MJ, Sullivan LC, et al. Allelic polymorphism in the T cell 
receptor and its impact on immune responses. The Journal of Experimental Medicine 2010, 
207(7): 1555-1567. 
 
39. Szymczak AL, Workman CJ, Wang Y, Vignali KM, Dilioglou S, Vanin EF, et al. Correction of 
multi-gene deficiency in vivo using a single 'self-cleaving' 2A peptide-based retroviral 
vector. Nat Biotechnol 2004, 22(5): 589-594. 
 31 
 
40. Kawachi I, Maldonado J, Strader C, Gilfillan S. MR1-Restricted VŒ±ͳ9i Mucosal-Associated 
Invariant T Cells Are Innate T Cells in the Gut Lamina Propria That Provide a Rapid and 
Diverse Cytokine Response. The Journal of Immunology 2006, 176(3): 1618-1627. 
 
41. Huang S, Gilfillan S, Cella M, Miley MJ, Lantz O, Lybarger L, et al. Evidence for MR1 Antigen 
Presentation to Mucosal-associated Invariant T Cells. Journal of Biological Chemistry 2005, 
280(22): 21183-21193. 
 
42. Hoiseth SK, Stocker BAD. Aromatic-dependent Salmonella typhimurium are non-virulent 
and effective as live vaccines. Nature 1981, 291(5812): 238-239. 
 
43. Kabsch W. Xds. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr 2010, 66(Pt 2): 125-132. 
 
44. Winn MD, Ballard CC, Cowtan KD, Dodson EJ, Emsley P, Evans PR, et al. Overview of the 
CCP4 suite and current developments. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr 2011, 67(Pt 4): 
235-242. 
 
45. McCoy AJ, Grosse-Kunstleve RW, Adams PD, Winn MD, Storoni LC, Read RJ. Phaser 
crystallographic software. J Appl Crystallogr 2007, 40(Pt 4): 658-674. 
 
46. Adams PD, Afonine PV, Bunkoczi G, Chen VB, Davis IW, Echols N, et al. PHENIX: a 
comprehensive Python-based system for macromolecular structure solution. Acta 
Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr 2010, 66(Pt 2): 213-221. 
 
47. Emsley P, Lohkamp B, Scott WG, Cowtan K. Features and development of Coot. Acta 
Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr 2010, 66(Pt 4): 486-501. 
 
48. Chen VB, Arendall WB, 3rd, Headd JJ, Keedy DA, Immormino RM, Kapral GJ, et al. 
MolProbity: all-atom structure validation for macromolecular crystallography. Acta 
Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr 2010, 66(Pt 1): 12-21. 
 
  
 32 
Supplementary data 
 
Supplementary Figure 1. In silico screening of MR1 ligands.  
a) Superimposition of 9 drugs (sticks) on 5-OP-RU. These drugs are consistent with the shape matching 
to 6-FP. Colored chemical structures of drugs (e.g. Acyclovir, Lamivudine, Methotrexate) correspond to 
colored sticks, with other drugs shown in grey. b) Side view of all 20 virtual screening drug hits (shown 
as surfaces) in complementarity with the MR1 binding site. Carbon (white); oxygen (red); nitrogen 
(blue); chlorine (green); fluorine (cyan). c) RMSD comparison of re-docked 5-OP-RU by different 
scoring functions with the structure of 5-OP-RU (pdb: 4NQD) in crystal structure. 
 
Supplementary Figure 2.  MR1 upregulation and MAIT activation. 
a) Graphical display of percentages MR1 upregulating versus agonistic compounds identified as part of 
the functional screen in Figure 2a. b) gMFI of 26.5 (mean of triplicate samples and SEM) and isotype  
control (single samples) staining at 7 hours for Nil, vehicle controls (V) and ligands (left panel). Repeat 
experiment of Figure 2c including 5-F-SA (right panel) showing single samples. c) First 2 rows: 
Drug/small molecule dose dependent inhibition of Jurkat.MAIT-#6 and Jurkat.MAIT-C-F7 activated by 
5-OP-RU in the presence of C1R.MR1 cells and assayed by flow cytometric staining for CD69 as a 
marker of activation. Displayed is gMFI CD69 fold of background control for one representative of three 
experiments. 5-OP-RU activation with nil inhibitor/activator was assayed in triplicate displaying mean 
and SEM (error bars). Third row: gMFI of CD69 (mean of triplicate samples and SEM) for Nil (PBS), 
vehicle controls with maximum concentration of 5-OP-RU, and ligands co-incubated with 
PMA/Ionomycin are displayed for Jurkat.MAIT-A-F7, Jurkat.MAIT-#6 and Jurkat.MAIT-C-F7. d) IL-
2 production in the presence of PBS, vehicle controls with maximum concentration of 5-OP-RU, and 
ligands co-incubated with PMA/Ionomycin. Displayed are mean of triplicate samples except for ligands 
co-incubated with PMA/Ionomycin where single samples are shown. e) Repeat experiment of Figure 
2d/f including in addition gMFI of CD69 (mean of triplicate samples and SEM) for vehicle controls with 
maximum concentration of 5-OP-RU, ligands and ligands co-incubated with PMA/Ionomycin (left 
panel). In parallel the effect of ligands and vehicles on Jurkat.CD8.LC13 activation by C1R.HLA-
B*08:01 in the presence of FLR peptide was tested (right panel).   
  
Supplementary Figure 3. Scaffold classes and structures of bioassay-identified molecules.  
Classification of twenty-two representative structures of active compounds (including 9 drugs) according 
to their chemical substructures: pyrimidines (black), phenols/anilines (green), enones (red), aromatic 
 33 
aldehydes (orange), aromatic carboxylates (olive), quinones (dark blue), flavones (light blue), 
isoflavones (pink). 
 
Supplementary Figure 4. Degradation of 2,4-DA-6-FP. 
a) Chemical structures of aminopterin/folic acid (I) as they decompose to form respective formyl pterin 
(II) and aminobenzoylglutamic acid (III). The aldehyde on (II) then further degrades to carboxylic acid 
(IV). b) Absorbance spectra of aminopterin after exposure to a fluorescent lamp for 0h (green), 18h 
(orange) and 48h (red). c&d) MR1 surface upregulation by C1R.MR1 cells treated with 20M or 2M 
of photodegraded aminopterin from (b), shown as histogram of 26.5 (c) and as MFI 26.5-fold of PBS 
vehicle control (mean of triplicate samples with SEM). Representative of two separate experiments. e) 
Mass spectra and elemental analysis of compound extracted from MR1 refolded in the presence of 
photodegraded aminopterin compared with theoretical spectra for 2,4-DA-6-FP. 
 
Supplementary Figure 5. Activation of MR1 restricted T cell lines by DCF and DCF metabolites  
Effect of Diclofenac and its metabolites on MR1 restricted T cell lines and Jurkat.CD8.LC13 activation 
by C1R.HLA-B*08:01 co-incubated with FLR peptide. Displayed are fold of background MFI CD69 (a) 
or MFI CD69 (b) for one representative of two experiments. 
 
Supplementary Figure 6. Inhibition of MAIT cell activation by drugs and drug-related molecules 
ex vivo.  
a) % cytokine production gated on live, CD3+, TRAV1-2+ 5-OP-RU-MR1-tetramer- (representative of 
non MAIT T cells) or TRAV1-2+ 5-OP-RU-MR1-tetramer+ (MAIT cells) cells. Samples include titrating 
amounts of 5-OP-RU, vehicle controls in the presence of maximum concentration of 5-OP-RU, Nil 
(PBS), and maximum concentration of inhibitors in the presence or absence of PMA/Ionomycin stimulus. 
Displayed is data of one representative donor. b) % CTV dilution gated on live, CD3+, TRAV1-2+ 5-OP-
RU-MR1-tetramer- (representative of non MAIT T-cells) or TRAV1-2+ 5-OP-RU-MR1-tetramer+ 
(MAIT cells) cells. Samples include titrating amounts of 5-OP-RU (triplicate samples, SEM) and Nil 
(triplicate samples, SEM), vehicles (triplicate samples, SEM) and maximum concentrations of inhibitors 
in the presence (triplicate samples, SEM) or absence (single samples) of plate bound CD3/CD28. 
Displayed is data of one representative donor. 
 
 
Supplementary Figure 7.  Inhibition of MAIT cell activation by small molecules in vivo. 
 34 
(a) Inhibitory effect of intranasally administered Ac-6-FP and 3-F-SA on MAIT cell accumulation in the 
lungs of C57BL/6 mice upon 5-OP-RU and Salm.BRD509ΔribDH stimulus. Matching data in Figure 4c, 
absolute numbers of MAIT cells and non-MAIT  T cells (mean values +/- SEM as error bars of four 
mice as well as CFU counts in the lungs are shown. (b) Repeat experiment at the maximum inhibitor 
concentration including in addition IL17 production by non-MAIT  T cells in response to 
Salm.BRD509ΔribDH stimulus in the presence or absence of inhibitors. 
 
Supplementary Figure 8.  MR1 structures with drugs and drug related molecules.  
A-F) Omit map of 2,4-DA-6-FP (A), 2-OH-1-NA (B), HMB (C), 3-F-SA (D) DCF (E) and 5-OH-DCF 
(F), after simulated-annealing refinement using Phenix-refine. Fo-Fc map (green mesh) contoured at 3. 
G) Overlay of all drug/drug related ternary structures. 
 
Supplementary Figure 9. TCR contacts with MR1.  
Contact regions of the CDR1   
CDR2  ple for - and -chains, 
respectively) of A-F7 MAIT TCR on MR1 (white surface), which is presenting 5-OP-RU (A), 6-FP (B), 
2,4-DA-6-FP (C), 2-OH-1-NA (D), HMB (E), 3-F-SA (F), DCF (G) or 5-OH-DCF (H). 
 
Supplementary Figure  10.   Docking of selected ligands into the MR1 binding site. 
Predicted ligand binding poses from docking of in silico ligand hits into the 5-OP-RU binding site in 
MR1. Examples shown are a) 3-F-SA, b) 2-OH-1-NA, c) 1,2-Naphthoquinone-4-sulfonic acid (1,2-NQ-
4-SA), d) HMB, e) DCF, f) Doxophylline, g) Floxuridine, h) Menadione, i) Aspirin. MR1 residues 
(yellow sticks), TCR residue Y95 (wheat stick), hydrogen bonds (black dashed lines). 
 
Supplementary Figure 11. Chemical synthesis of metabolites. 
Synthesis of 2,4-diamino-6-formylpteridine (A), 4,5-dihydroxy diclofenac (B) and 5-hydroxy 
diclofenac (C). 
  
 35 
Supplementary Table 1. Summary of in silico hits (147) from fragment based screening.  
Name CAS No. MW 
1-Amino-2-naphthol-4-sulfonic acid 116-63-2 239.25 
1,2-Naphthoquinone-4-sulfonic acid sodium salt 521-24-4 260.20 
1,2,4-Benzenetricarboxylic acid 528-44-9 210.14 
1,3,5-Benzenetricarboxylic acid 554-95-0 210.14 
1,4-Benzodioxan-6-carboxaldehyde 29668-44-8 164.16 
1,4-Benzoquinone 106-51-4 108.09 
1,4-Naphthoquinone 130-15-4 158.15 
2-Acetamidobenzoic acid 89-52-1 179.17 
2-Acetyl-1-methylpyrrole 932-16-1 123.15 
2-Acetyl-5-methylfuran 1193-79-9 124.14 
2-Acetylthiophene 88-15-3 126.18 
2-Amino-3,5-dibromobenzaldehyde 50910-55-9 278.93 
2-Amino-6-mercaptopurine (Thioguanine)a 154-42-7 167.19 
2-Aminonicotinic acid 5345-47-1 138.12 
2-Aminopyrimidine 109-12-6 95.10 
2-Anilino-1,4-naphthoquinone 6628-97-3 249.27 
2-Anisaldehyde 135-02-4 136.15 
2-Anisic acid 579-75-9 152.15 
2-Benzoylbenzoic acid 85-52-9 226.23 
2-Biphenylcarboxaldehyde 1203-68-5 182.22 
2-Biphenylcarboxylic acid 947-84-2 198.22 
2-Carbethoxy-5,7-dihydroxy-4'-methoxyisofavone 15485-76-4 356.33 
2-Carboxybenzaldehyde 119-67-5 150.13 
2-Chloro-3-nitrobenzoic acid 3970-35-2 201.56 
2-Chloro-4-nitrobenzoic acid 99-60-5 201.56 
2-Cis,4-trans-abscisic acid 14375-45-2 264.32 
2-furyl methyl ketone 1192-62-7 110.11 
2-Hydroxy-1-naphthaldehyde 708-06-5 172.18 
2-Hydroxy-1,4-naphthoquinone 83-72-7 174.15 
2-Hydroxy-4-methoxybenzaldehyde 673-22-3 152.15 
2-Hydroxy-5-methoxybenzaldehyde 672-13-9 152.15 
2-Hydroxyphenylacetic acid 614-75-5 152.15 
2-Methyl-1,4-naphthoquinone (Menadione)a 58-27-5 172.18 
2-Pyrazinecarboxylic acid 98-97-5 124.10 
2-Quinoxalinecarboxylic acid 879-65-2 174.16 
2,3-Pyridinedicarboxylic acid 339155-13-4 167.12 
2,4-Diamino-6-formylpteridine 4261-17-0 190.16 
2,5-Dimethyl-p-benzoquinone 137-18-8 136.15 
2,6-Dichloroquinone-4-chloroimide 101-38-2 210.45 
2,6-Pyridinedicarboxylic acid 499-83-2 167.12 
3-Acetylbenzonitrile 6136-68-1 145.16 
3-Acetylcoumarin 3949-36-8 188.18 
3-Amino-2-naphthoic acid 5959-52-4 187.19 
3-Anisaldehyde 591-31-1 136.15 
3-Benzyloxy-4-methoxybenzaldehyde 6346-05-0 242.27 
3-Chloro-2-nitrobenzoic acid 4771-47-5 201.56 
3-Chlorosalicylic acid 1829-32-9 172.57 
3-Ethoxy-4-hydroxybenzaldehyde 121-32-4 166.17 
3-Formylsalicylic acid 610-04-8 166.13 
3-Hydroxy-4-methyl-2-nitrobenzoic acid 6946-15-2 197.14 
3-Hydroxybenzoic acid 99-06-9 138.12 
3-Hydroxyflavone 577-85-5 238.24 
3,4-Dichlorobenzaldehyde 6287-38-3 175.01 
3,4-Pyridinedicarboxylic acid 490-11-9 167.12 
3,4,5-Trihydroxybenzaldehyde 13677-79-7 154.12 
4-Acetamidobenzaldehyde 122-85-0 163.17 
4-Acetylpyridine 1122-54-9 121.14 
4-Aminouracil 873-83-6 127.10 
4-Anisaldehyde 123-11-5 136.15 
4-Benzyloxy-3-methoxybenzaldehyde 2426-87-1 242.27 
4-Biphenylacetic acid 5728-52-9 212.24 
4-Biphenylcarboxaldehyde 3218-36-8 182.22 
4-Biphenylcarboxylic acid 92-92-2 198.22 
4-Chloro-3-nitrobenzaldehyde 16588-34-4 185.56 
4-Formylbenzoic acid 619-66-9 150.13 
4-Guanidinobenzoic acid 16060-65-4 179.18 
4-Hydroxy-3-methoxybenzaldehyde (isovanillin) 621-59-0 152.15 
4-Hydroxy-3-methoxyphenylacetic acid 1131-94-8 182.17 
4-Hydroxy-3-nitrobenzoic acid 616-82-0 183.12 
4-Hydroxyphenylacetic acid 156-38-7 152.15 
4-Phenoxybenzoic acid 2215-77-2 214.22 
5-Aminonaphthalene-2-sulfonic acid 119-79-9 223.25 
5-Aminosalicylic acid 89-57-6 153.14 
5-Bromo-2'-deoxyuridine (Broxuridine) 59-14-3 307.10 
5-Bromosalicylaldehyde 1761-61-1 201.02 
5-Bromouracil 51-20-7 190.98 
 36 
5-Chlorosalicylic acid 321-14-2 172.57 
5-Formylsalicylic acid 616-76-2 166.13 
5-Hydroxy-1,4-naphthoquinone 481-39-0 174.15 
5,8-Dihydroxy-1,4-naphthoquinone 475-38-7 190.15 
6-Aminonicotinic acid 7418-65-7 138.12 
6-Chloro-4-hydroxycoumarine 19484-57-2 196.59 
6-Chloropurine 87-42-3 154.56 
7-Hydroxyflavone 6665-86-7 238.24 
8-Aminonaphthalene-2-sulfonic acid 119-28-8 223.25 
8-Hydroxyquinoline-2-carboxylic acid 1571-30-8 189.17 
8-Hydroxyquinoline-5-sulfonic acid 207386-92-3 225.22 
9-Anthraldehyde 642-31-9 206.24 
Acridone 578-95-0 195.22 
Adenine 73-24-5 135.13  
Adenosine 58-61-7 267.24 
Alloxan 50-71-5 142.07 
Alpha-Ionone 127-41-3 192.30 
Anthraflavic acid 84-60-6 240.21 
Anthranilic acid 118-92-3 137.14 
Anthraquinone-2-sulfonic acid sodium salt 131-08-8 310.26 
Apigenin (4',5,7-trihydroxyflavone) 520-36-5 270.24 
Baicalein (5,6,7-trihydroxyflavone) 491-67-8 270.24 
Benzalacetone (4-phenyl-3-buten-2-one) 122-57-6 146.19 
Benzbromarone 3562-84-3 424.08 
Benzofuran-2-carboxylic acid 496-41-3 162.14 
Biochanin A (5,7-dihydroxy-4'methoxyisoflavone) 491-80-5 284.26 
Bumetanide 28395-03-1 364.42 
Calconcarboxylic acid  3737-95-9 438.41 
Chelidamic acid 138-60-3 183.12 
Chromone-2-carboxylic acid 4940-39-0 190.15 
Chrysin (5,7-Dihydroxyflavone) 480-40-0 254.24 
Coumarina 91-64-5 146.14 
Dehydroacetic acid 520-45-6 168.15 
Di-furan-2-yl-methanone  17920-86-4 162.14 
Dicumarol (3,3'-methylenebis[4-hydroxycoumarin]) 66-76-2 336.29 
Duroquinone (tetramethyl-p-benzoquinone) 527-17-3 164.20 
Galangin (3,5,7-trihydroxyflavone) 548-83-4 270.24 
Gallocyanine (7-dimethylamino-4-hydroxy-3-oxo-phenoxazine-1-carboxylic acid) 1562-85-2 336.73 
Genistein  (4',5,7-trihydroxyisoflavone) 446-72-0 270.24 
Homogentisic acid (2,5-dihydroxyphenylacetic acid) 451-13-8 168.15 
Hypoxanthine (6-hydroxypurine) 68-94-0 136.11 
Indole-2-carboxylic acid 1477-50-5 161.16 
Indole-3-carboxaldehyde 487-89-8 145.16 
Isophorone 78-59-1 138.21 
Isophthalaldehyde 626-19-7 134.13 
Isoquinoline-1-carboxylic acid 486-73-7 173.17 
Isovanillic acid (3-hydroxy-4-methoxybenzoic acid) 645-08-9 168.15 
Kaempferol (3,4',5,7-tetrahydroxyflavone) 520-18-3 286.24 
Khellin 82-02-0 260.24 
Kinetin (6-Furfurylaminopurine) 525-79-1 215.21 
Kojic acid 501-30-4 142.11 
Leucopterin (2-amino-4,6,7-trihydroxypteridine) 492-11-5 195.14 
Luteolin (3',4',5,7-tetrahydroxyflavone) 491-70-3 286.24 
Menadione sodium bisulfite  130-37-0 276.24 
Morin hydrate (1',3,3',5,7-pentahydroxyflavone) 654055-01-3 302.24 
Myricetin (3,3',4',5,5',7-hexahydroxyflavone) 529-44-2 318.24 
Naringenin (4',5,7-trihydroxyflavanone) 67604-48-2 272.25 
Phloroglucinol carbaldehyde (2,4,6-trihydroxybenzaldehyde) 487-70-7 154.12 
Picramic acid (2-amino-4,6-dinitrophenol) 96-91-3 199.12 
Quercetin (3,3',4',5,7-pentahydroxyflavone) 117-39-5 302.24 
Rhodizonic acid 118-76-3 170.08 
Tenofovir 147127-20-6 287.22 
Tetrachloro-o-benzoquinone 2435-53-2 245.88 
Tetrahydroxy-1,4-quinone 319-89-1 172.09 
Theobromine 83-67-0 180.16 
Theophylline (1,3-dimethylxanthine) 58-55-9 180.16 
Thiamine hydrochloride (vatamin B1) 67-03-8 337.27 
Toluquinone 553-97-9 122.12 
Uridine 58-96-8 244.20 
Vanillan (4-hydroxy-3-methoxybenzaldehyde) 121-33-5 152.15 
Xanthopterin 119-44-8 179.14 
a
 also identified as FDA drug hits in Supplementary Table 2.  
 37 
Supplementary Table 2. Summary of screened and tested FDA approved drugs. 
Name CAS No. MW Use 
Acyclovir 59277-89-3  225.21 antiviral  
Amrinone 60719-84-8  187.20 pyridine phosphodiesterase 3 inhibitor  
Aspirin 50-78-2 180.16 anti-inflammation, antipyretic 
Azacytidine 320-67-2 244.21 antineoplastic 
Azathiopurine 446-86-6 277.27 immunosuppressive antimetabolite  
Chlorothiazide 58-94-6 295.72 a thiazide diuretic 
Chloroxine 773-76-2 214.05 antibacterial  
Coumarina 91-64-5 146.14 perfumes and fabric conditioners,  
Diclofenac 15307-86-5 296.15 NSAID 
Diflunisal 22494-42-4 250.20 NSAID 
Doxofylline 69975-86-6 266.25 treatment of asthma 
Dyphylline 479-18-5 254.24 broncho- and vasodilator  
Fenoprofen 31879-05-7 242.27 anti-inflammatory  
Floxuridine 50-91-9 246.19 antineoplastic antimetabolite  
Flucytosine 2022-85-7 129.09 antifungal 
Flufenamic acida 530-78-9 281.23 analgesic, anti-inflammatory 
Ketorolac 74103-06-3 255.27 NSAID 
Lamivudine 134678-17-4 229.26 a reverse transcriptase inhibitor 
Mefenamic acid 61-68-7 241.29 NSAID 
Menadionea 58-27-5 172.18 precursor of vitamin K2  
Mercaptopurine 50-44-2 152.18 antimetabolite  
Methaqualone 72-44-6 250.30 sedative-hypnotic drug 
Methotrexate 59-05-2 454.44 antineoplastic  
Methoxamine 390-28-3 211.26 alpha-adrenergic agonist  
Methoxsalen 298-81-7 216.19 natural product targeting DNA  
Nalidixic acid 389-08-2 232.24 antimicrobial 
Phenazopyridine 94-78-0 213.24 used in urinary tract disorders 
Phenylephrine 59-42-7 167.21 α-adrenergic receptor agonist  
Pipemidic acid 51940-44-4 303.32 antibacterial 
Pyrimethamine 58-14-0 248.71 folic acid antagonist  
Quinethazone 73-49-4 289.74 diuretic  
Salsalate 552-94-3 258.23 NSAID 
Thioguanine 154-42-7 167.19 antineoplastic, antimetabolite 
Triameterenea 396-01-0 253.26 a pteridine diuretic 
Trimethoprim 738-70-5 290.32 antibacterial 
Trichloromethiazide 133-67-5 380.66 A thiazide diuretic  
   
 
Diclofenac Metabolites and 
other NSAIDsb 
   
4'-hydroxydiclofenac 64118-84-9 312.15 Metabolite of diclofenac 
5-hydroxydiclofenac 69002-84-2 312.15 Metabolite of diclofenac 
4',5-dihydroxydiclofenac 69002-86-4 328.15 Metabolite of diclofenac 
Diclofenac Acyl-β-D-
glucuronide 
64118-81-6 472.27 Metabolite of diclofenac 
Diclofenac Acyl-β-D-
glucuronide allyl ester 
698358-10-0 512.34 Metabolite of diclofenac 
Celecoxib 169590-42-5 381.37 NSAID 
Etodolac 41340-25-4 287.35 NSAID 
Flunixin 38677-85-9 296.24 NSAID 
Flurbiprofen 5104-49-4 244.26 NSAID 
Indomethacin 53-86-1 357.79 NSAID 
Meloxicam 71125-38-7 351.4 NSAID  
Rofecoxib 162011-90-7 314.36 NSAID 
Piroxicam 36322-90-4 331.35 NSAID  
Tenoxicam 59804-37-4 337.37 NSAID 
 
a
 Drugs not approved in US, but approved in other countries. 
b Metabolites of Diclofenac and COX-2 inhibitors. The latter were included after identification of diclofenac as an MR1 
ligand. Note: Some drugs are no longer approved in USA but are still prescribed in other countries. E.g. Coumarin is sold in 
India (Dipodem), Argentina (Esberiven), Brazil (Venalot), Taiwan (Venalot Depot). Flufenamic acid is sold in Japan 
(Fenazol 5%), Taiwan (Flufemin). Trychloromethiazide is sold in Japan (Flutria), Taiwan (Eazide). Pipemidic acid is sold in 
Brazil (Balurol), Italy (Diperpen). Menadione (vitamin K3) is approved for veterinary use in countries like Germany (Vita 
Men), Australia (Solquin), Italy (Izokappa), Chile (Katin). (Information obtained from www.drugs.com) 
 
 
 38 
 
Supplementary Table 3.  Small molecule screening 
 39 
Colour coding as in Figure 2a
 
Compounds Normalized Jurkat.MAIT activation Normalized MR1 upregulation
Name Use/Origin 100 m M 10 m M 100 m M 10 m M
1,2-Naphthoquinone-4-sulfonic acid Colourimetric determination. Synthesis of anticancer agents. -0.48 -0.97 10.31 2.98
1,4-Benzodioxan-6-carboxaldehyde Intermediate. -4.20 -1.95 1.41 0.88
1,4-Naphthoquinone Derivatives have pharmacological properties. 7.43 0.48 -4.02 35.63
2-Amino-6-mercaptopurine Incorparates into DNA and inhibits synthesis. Treatment of leukaemia. -4.08 3.29 -0.43 -3.26
2-Carboxybenzaldehyde Intermediate. Metabolite of ampicillin phthalidyl ester. -1.06 -2.69 3.06 2.12
2-Furyl methyl ketone Intermediate. Used in the production of the antibiotic Cefuroxime. -0.40 -2.16 -0.46 -1.39
2-Hydroxy-1-naphthaldehyde Intermediate. Active core of sirtinol. -0.11 4.98 125.12 107.76
2-Pyrazinecarboxylic acid Analogue is a urate retaining drug. Metabolite of Pyrazinamide. -3.34 -1.77 -1.54 0.32
3-Acetylcoumarin Intermediate. -3.23 -3.25 0.22 1.41
3-Formylsalicylic acid Analogue of salicylic acid. -4.07 -3.51 124.44 51.13
4-Biphenylacetic acid Anti-inflammatory, used in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis. -0.15 0.76 -0.86 -0.52
4-Guanidinobenzoic acid hydrochloride Intermediate. Aminobenzoic acid derivatives treat inflammation. -2.25 0.78 -2.06 -7.02
5-Aminosalicylic acid Treatment of ulcerative colitis etc. -1.06 -2.69 3.06 2.12
5-Bromouracil Major chemical mutagen. -2.95 -0.27 -6.67 -3.86
5-Chlorosalicylic acid Intermediate. -3.15 -2.44 0.59 0.66
5-Formylsalicylic acid Analogue of salicylic acid. 3.68 1.86 149.23 64.85
5-Hydroxy-1,4-naphthoquinone Colouring matter isolated from walnut shells. Used in herbal remedies. -20.19 1.45 -34.35 38.54
6-Chloro-4-hydroxy coumarine Coumarin is from plants. -0.06 0.87 -6.34 1.74
7-Hydroxyflavone Intermediate. Antifungal, analgesic. 3.07 -0.48 -12.11 -0.90
Acridone Intermediate. Derivatives show potential as antimalarial drugs. -5.69 -2.58 -11.03 -5.47
Acyclovir Acyclic nucleoside used in the treatment of viral infections. -3.41 -3.58 -2.30 -0.42
Amrinone Phosphodiesterase inhibitor. Cardiac stimulant and vasodilator. -2.79 -0.52 -0.54 1.02
Anthranilic acid Dyes, drugs, perfumes and pharmaceuticals. -3.23 -2.35 0.36 0.45
Apigenin Wool dye. Induces autophagy in leukaemia cells. Inhibits CYP2C9. -2.10 -2.91 75.45 28.78
Azacitidine Antineoplastic agent. Treats acute myeloid leukaemia. -4.88 3.32 -18.75 -17.79
Azathioprine Immunosuppressant and antieoplastic agent - treats leukaemia. 5.22 5.30 -10.17 -2.83
Baicalein Lipoxygenase inhibitor. Anti-inflammatory agent. In the herbal supplement Sho-Saiko-To. 4.36 -1.45 41.93 5.13
Benzbromarone Anti-gout medication. Inhibitor of CYP2C9. Causes hepatotoxicity. 18.90 0.00 -22.68 -3.46
Biochanin A A phytoestrogen, has putative benefits in dietary cancer prophylaxis. 0.65 -0.16 -15.50 -2.62
Bumetanide A loop diuretic. Used in the tratment of heart failure. -4.20 -3.94 -0.77 -1.05
Celecoxib Analgesic and anti-inflammatory - rheumatoid and osteo-arthrisis. -2.23 -3.16 -2.74 -3.08
Chlorothiazide Used in the treatment of oedema. -4.76 -5.52 1.06 1.84
Chloroxine Treatment of amoebiasis, bacterial dysentary and skin infections. 24.14 -2.33 -17.76 -0.66
Coumarin Perfumes. Used in the treatment of asthma and lymphedema. -5.63 -4.83 -10.76 0.54
Dehydroacetic acid Fungicide and bactericide. Used in processed fruit and vegetables. -4.20 -2.26 14.24 1.54
Diclofenac Anti-inflammatory used to treat pain and other afflictions such as gout. 80.39 4.22 -12.20 6.27
Dicumarol Anticoagulant drug related to warfarin. -5.73 -3.86 -2.02 4.00
Diflunisal Analgesic, anti-inflammatory and antipyretic. 2.06 -0.67 -13.73 -1.31
Doxofylline Used in the treatment of asthma, a bronchodilator. -4.44 -3.13 19.88 6.08
Dyphylline Adenosine antagonist, exhibits strong activity as a bronchodilator. -5.04 -4.85 1.14 -0.45
Etodolac Analgesic, anti-inflammatory and antipyretic - rheumatoid disorders. -9.30 -3.62 -6.50 -2.40
Fenoprofen Analgesic and anti-inflammatory - rheumatoid and osteoarthrisis. 3.11 -2.27 -3.58 -2.69
Floxuridine Antineoplastic agent, inhibits DNA and RNA synthesis. 14.56 10.77 -0.36 -1.63
Flucytosine Antifungal agent used in the treatment of urinary tract infections. -4.55 -4.29 0.60 0.90
Flufenamic acid Analgesic and anti-inflammatory. Used in rheumatic disorders. -0.15 -3.49 -5.95 1.75
Flunixin Anti-inflammatory used by veterinarians. -8.50 -4.50 -14.93 -4.57
Flurbiprofen Analgesic, anti-inflammatory and antipyretic - rheumatoid disorders. 0.63 -3.66 -5.50 -2.81
Galangin Flavonol found in galanga root. Growth inhibitor of breast tumor cells. Antiviral, antibacetrial. 15.19 4.20 -15.41 -6.60
Genistein Phytoestrogen; tyrosine kinase inhibitor. Antioxidant and anthelmintic. -1.68 4.32 38.44 9.32
Indomethacin Analgesic with anti-inflammatory and antipyretic action. 3.48 5.22 -11.39 -6.85
Kaempferol Flavone, antioxidant. Possible cancer treatment. 2.04 6.13 -22.02 -10.51
Ketorolac Analgesic. Inhibits synthesis of prostaglandins. -5.89 -4.21 -8.69 -1.73
Khellin Vasodilator (asthma treatment). Induces skin pigmentation via UV light. -4.99 -2.83 -5.04 -2.78
Kojic acid Antibiotic. -3.39 -1.62 -0.80 6.00
Kabetalol Antihypertensive agent with beta-adrenoreceptor blocking properties. -2.97 0.61 -3.12 -1.79
Lamivudine Antiviral used in the treamtent of AIDS and hepatitis B. -4.21 -2.65 -2.27 -3.45
Luteolin Flavone; antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, anti-allergic and anti-cancer. -3.66 3.18 20.31 -4.98
m-Hydroxybenzoic acid Intermediate for plasticisers, resins, pharmaceuticals etc. -1.43 0.04 -2.12 -1.79
Mefenamic acid Anti-inflammartory. Relief from pain. Used in rheumatic disorders. -3.19 -3.23 -2.55 25.78
Meloxicam Analgesic and anti-inflammatory. Inhibits cyclooxygenase. -2.69 -6.02 -6.57 -3.97
Menadione Nutritional supplement. Treatment of hypoprothrombinemia. -11.55 -4.38 14.33 47.01
Menadione sodium bisulfite Reduces blood clotting time. Treatment for hyperprothrombinaemia. 21.16 -0.48 20.43 129.16
Mercaptopurine Antineoplastic agent - treatment of leukaemia. Adenine analog. 17.51 14.14 -3.52 -3.37
Methaqualone A hypnotic, used to be used for the treatment of insomnia. -2.34 -0.43 -3.60 -2.22
Methoxamine A pressor agent in hytotensive states. -0.82 -0.87 -2.58 -2.42
Methoxsalen Increases the formation of melanin following exposure to UV light. -4.63 -3.47 2.58 1.34
Nalidixic acid Bactericide used in the treatment of urinary-tract infections. -3.77 -4.57 0.42 0.64
Phenazopyridine Used in pain relief for conditions such as cystitis and urethritis. -2.08 -0.89 -8.57 -0.67
Phenylephrine Treatment of hypotensive states and the relief of nasal congestion. -5.02 -4.66 -0.84 1.61
Pipemidic acid Intermediate. A quinolone (synthetic broad-spectrum antibacterial). -4.45 -8.50 -16.15 -14.36
Piroxicam Analgesic, anti-inflammatory and antipyretic - rheumatoid disorders. -0.93 -3.58 -6.05 -3.79
Pyrimethamine Antimalarial drug and dihydrofolate reductase inhibitor. -5.40 -5.40 -20.14 -15.35
Quinethazone Thiazide-like diuretic used to treat hypertension. -3.72 -1.13 -3.02 -2.12
Rofecoxib Analgesic and anti-inflammatory. Inhibits sysnthesis of prostaglandins. -4.97 -2.23 -4.01 -3.29
Salsalate Anti-inflammatory, used in the treament of arthritis. -2.42 2.10 1.47 -0.75
Tenofovir Anti-retroviral, blocks reverse transcriptase. -4.59 -4.34 -2.50 -4.21
Tenoxicam Anti-inflammatory - treats rheumatoid arthristis, osteoarthristis etc. -1.94 -3.37 -1.85 -1.12
Tetrahydroxy-1,4-quinone hydrate Systemic keratolytic. 11.20 0.94 33.47 4.02
Theobromine Vasodilator, diuretic and heart stimulant. 0.41 2.69 -9.49 -10.00
Triamterene Diuretic used in the treatment of hypertension and edema. 6.14 3.49 -3.82 -3.41
Trichlormethiazide Antihypertensive. Diuretic used to treat oedema. -1.62 -1.13 -5.31 -2.58
Trimethoprim Antibacterial. 0.65 -1.29 -4.92 -1.78
 40 
Supplementary Table 4.  IC50 values of the inhibitors tested 
 
 
T cell line Inhibitor Conc. 5-OP-RU IC50 ( m M) R2 of IC50 
Jurkat.MAIT-A-F7 (TRBV6-1) 6-FP 1 nM 71.40 0.97 
0.1 nM 8.86 1.00 
0.01 nM ND 
Ac-6-FP 1 nM 3.91 0.99 
0.1 nM ND 
0.01 nM ND 
3-F-SA 1 nM 90.34 0.98 
0.1 nM 12.25 1.00 
0.01 nM ND 
2-OH-1-NA 1 nM ND 
0.1 nM 134.00 0.90 
0.01 nM 26.85 0.87 
Jurkat.MAIT-#6 (TRBV6-4) 6-FP 1 nM 122.20 0.99 
0.1 nM 12.86 1.00 
0.01 nM 0.29 0.98 
Ac-6-FP 1 nM 0.36 1.00 
0.1 nM ND 
0.01 nM ND 
3-F-SA 1 nM 150.20 1.00 
0.1 nM 18.01 1.00 
0.01 nM 8.47 0.98 
2-OH-1-NA 1 nM ND 
0.1 nM 106.90 0.98 
0.01 nM 17.24 0.94 
Jurkat.MAIT-C-F7 (TRBV20) 6-FP 1 nM 145.80 0.98 
0.1 nM 13.04 1.00 
0.01 nM 0.33 0.94 
Ac-6-FP 1 nM 0.42 0.99 
0.1 nM ND 
0.01 nM ND 
3-F-SA 1 nM ND 
0.1 nM 12.62 0.98 
0.01 nM 8.87 1.00 
2-OH-1-NA 1 nM ND 
0.1 nM 555.10 1.00 
0.01 nM 24.01 0.90 
Bw58.CD3.MAIT-V b 8.2 6-FP 10 m M 101.30 0.98 
5 m M 166.80 0.99 
1 m M 93.35 0.89 
Ac-6-FP 10 m M 31.46 0.98 
5 m M 17.52 1.00 
1 m M 13.94 0.94 
3-F-SA 10 m M 113.50 0.89 
5 m M 77.66 0.99 
1 m M 27.02 1.00 
2-OH-1-NA 10 m M 36.30 1.00 
5 m M 34.20 1.00 
1 m M 31.28 1.00 
ND: Not determined when non-linear regression did not converge or was ambiguous. 
 41 
Supplementary Table 5.  Data collection and refinement statistics 
 A-F7 TCR: MR1(HMB) A-F7 TCR: MR1(DCF) A-F7 TCR: MR1(2,4-DA-6-
FP) 
A-F7 TCR:  
MR1(2-H-1-NA) 
A-F7 TCR: MR1(3-F-SA) A-F7 TCR: MR1(5-
OH-DCF) 
Data collection        
Temperature 100K 100K 100K 100K 100K 100K 
Space group C2 C2 C2 C2 C2 C2 
Cell dimensions       
    a, b, c (Å) 216.2, 69.7, 142.4 212.6. 69.5, 142.9 215.3, 69.7, 142.4 216.4, 69.9, 143.1 217.1, 70.5, 143.4 213.1, 69.6, 142.4  )  90, 104.3, 90 90, 103.4, 90 90, 104.0, 90 90 104.4, 90 90.0, 104.8, 90.0 90, 103.7, 90 
Resolution (Å) 52.37-2.20 (2.24-2.20) 49.0-2.70 (2.78-2.70) 45.35-2.10 (2.14-2.10) 75.15-2.10 (2.14-2.10) 53.97-1.90 (1.93-1.90) 57.87-2.50 (2.56-2.50) 
Rpim1 4.8 (27.3) 8.1 (50.7) 6.5 (57.8) 5.8 (36.7) 4.5 (38.1) 4.4 (28.8) 
CC1/2 99.6 (86.0) 98.0 (71.0) 99.5 (59.7) 99.3 (82.1) 99.7 (74.6) 99.6 (87.4) 
I/1 10.4 (2.3) 6.6 (1.3) 8.0 (1.4) 7.9 (2.1) 11.1 (1.8) 12.3 (2.3) 
Completeness (%) 99.7 (97.8) 98.6 (99.2) 100.0 (100.0) 99.8 (100) 97.6 (94.2) 98.7 (97.8) 
Total No.  observations 
No.  unique observations 
448364 (19719) 
104381 (5091) 
154771 (12941) 
55489 (4567) 
524584 (25862) 
119864 (5891) 
445269 (22402) 
120949 (6014) 
722223 (35045) 
161424 (7648) 
273724 (14991) 
69625 (4403) 
Multiplicity 4.3 (2.9) 2.8 (2.8) 4.4 (4.4) 3.7 (3.7) 4.5 (4.6) 3.9 (3.4) 
       
Refinement statistics       
Rfactor 2 (%) 18.4 18.8 18.0 17.3 18.1 17.3 
Rfree 3 (%) 22.8 23.8 22.6 21.9 22.5 23.1 
No. atoms  Protein  Ligand  Water 
 
12788 
32 
1067 
 
12825 
70 
172 
 
12816 
91 
882 
 
12799 
60 
1217 
 
12855 
37 
1429 
 
12762 
42 
437 
Ramachandran plot (%)   Most favoured  Allowed region   
 
97.0 
2.9 
 
97.0 
2.9 
 
98 
2 
 
98 
2 
 
98.0 
1.9 
 
97.5 
2.5 
B-factors (Å2)  Protein   35.1  54.4  40.4  34.4  35.3  45.9 
rmsd bonds (Å) 0.011 0.004 0.009 0.010 0.008 0.06 
rmsd angles () 1.27 0.85 1.19 1.22 1.13 0.97 
 
 
1 Rp.i.m = hkl [1/(N-1)]1/2  i | Ihkl, i - <Ihkl> | / hkl <Ihkl> 
2 Rfactor = (  | |Fo| - |Fc| | ) / (  |Fo| )  - for all data except as indicated in footnote 3. 
3 5% of data was used for the Rfree calculation  
Values in parentheses refer to the highest resolution bin. 
 42 
Supplementary Table 6: Buried surface area calculations of MR1-Ag:MAIT TCR interaction 
   Contribution (as % of total BSA)        
 Total (Å
2)  -Chain -Chain   CDR1 CDR2 CDR3 -framework CDR1 CDR2 CDR3 -framework 
A-F7 TCR: MR1(DA-6-FP) 1170.2   52.3 47.7   5.8 10.5 21.9 14.0 1.2 13.1 24.8 8.6 
A-F7 TCR:MR1(2-OH-1-NA) 1235.6  48.2 51.8  7.3 10.5 19.3 11.1 0.7 12.0 28.8 10.4 
A-F7 TCR:MR1(HMB) 1143.0  51.2 48.8  7.6 10.9 20.8 11.9 0.9 13.7 23.6 10.7 
A-F7 TCR:MR1(3-F-SA) 1210.0  48.5 51.5  7.1 10.7 20.1 10.6 0.7 11.8 27.8 11.1 
A-F7 TCR:MR1(DCF) 1206.5  49.4 50.6  8.3 11.2 18.2 11.8 2.2 12.4 25.9 10.1 
A-F7 TCR:MR1(5-OH-DCF) 1161.0  48.3 51.7  7.0 11.2 18.5 11.6 4.2 13.5 25.1 8.9 
  Determined using the CCP4 implementation of AreaiMol               
 43 
Supplementary Table 7. MAIT TCR (A-F7) contacts with MR1(DCF) 
CDR  TCR  MR1 Bond 
CDR1 Gly28 Glu160 VDW 
 Phe29N Glu160O2 H-bond 
 Phe29 Glu160, Asn155 VDW 
 Asn30 Trp156, Tyr152, Glu160 VDW 
    
CDR2 Val50 Tyr152, Asn155 VDW 
 Leu51 Leu151, Asn155 VDW 
    
CDR2 
framework 
Tyr48 His148, Tyr152 VDW 
 Glu55O1 His148N2 H-bond 
    
TCR 
framework 
Arg66N1 Asn155O1 H-bond 
 Arg66 Asn155, Glu159 VDW 
    
CDR3 Ser93 Tyr62, Glu160, Trp164 VDW 
 Asn94O Arg61N H-bond 
 Asn94O Arg61N2 H-bond 
 Asn94O Tyr62O H-Bond 
 Asn94  Arg61, Tyr62, Trp164 VDW 
 Tyr95O Trp156N1 H-bond 
 Tyr95 Arg61, Tyr62, Leu65, Tyr152, Trp156 VDW 
 Asn96 Arg61 VDW 
 Gln96 Arg61 VDW 
    
CDR1 Asn30 Met72 VDW 
    
CDR2 Ala50 Gln64 VDW 
 Ser51 Gly68, Arg67 VDW 
 Gly53 Arg41 VDW 
 Thr54O Gln64O1 H-bond 
 Thr54 Gln64, Arg67 VDW 
 Thr55 Gln64 VDV 
    
CDR2 
framework 
Tyr48O Arg61N1 H-bond 
 Tyr48 Arg61 VDW 
 Thr55 Gln64 VDW 
 Asp56 Gln64 VDW 
    
CDR3 Trp96 Leu65, Gly68, Trp69, Met72 VDW 
 Thr97 Arg61, Leu65 VDW 
 Glu99 Arg9, Trp69, Tyr152 VDW 
 Glu99 O1 Trp69 N1 H-Bond 
 Glu99 O2 Arg9N1, Trp69 N1 H-Bond 
 Gly100 Glu149, Tyr152 VDW 
 Ser101O2 Glu149 O1, Glu149N H-Bond 
 Ser101 His148, Glu149 VDW 
    
    
    
    
 44 
 DCF MR1 Bond 
 
C Tyr7, Ser24, Leu66 VDW 
 C1 Tyr62, Leu66 VDW 
 C2 Arg9, Tyr62 VDW 
 C3 Try62 VDW 
 C4 Tyr7 VDW 
 C5 Tyr7 VDW 
 C6 Tyr7, Trp164 VDW 
 C7 Leu5, Tyr7, Trp156 VDW 
 C8 Tyr7, Trp156 VDW 
 C9 Tyr7 VDW 
 C10 Tyr62 VDW 
 C11 Arg9, Tyr62 VDW 
 C12 Arg9, Trp69 VDW 
 C13 Arg9, Tyr62 VDW 
 Cl Tyr7, Tyr62 VDW 
 Cl1 Tyr7, Arg9 VDW 
 N Tyr7, Tyr62 VDW 
 O ArgN, ArgN2 H-bond 
 O Tyr7, Arg9, Ser24, Leu66 VDW 
 O1 Ser24O H-Bond 
 O1 Tyr7, Ser24, Leu66 VDW 
    
    
 DCF TCR Bond 
 C10 Tyr95 VDW 
 C11 Glu99, Tyr95 VDW 
 C12 Glu99 VDW 
    
  Atomic contacts determined using the CCP4i implementation of CONTACT and a cutoff of 4Å.   Van der Waals interactions defined as non-hydrogen bond contact distances of 4Å or less.  Hydrogen bond interactions are defined as contact distances of 3.3Å or less.  Salt bridge interactions are defined as contact distances of 4.5Å or less. 
 
 
 
  
 45 
Supplementary Table 8 
MAIT TCR (A-F7) contacts with MR1(5-OH-DCF) 
CDR  TCR  MR1 Bond 
CDR1 Gly28 Glu160 VDW 
 Phe29N Glu160O2 H-bond 
 Phe29O Asn155N2 H-bond 
 Phe29 Glu160 VDW 
 Asn30 Tyr152, Trp156, Glu160 VDW 
    
CDR2 Val50 Leu151, Tyr152, Asn155 VDW 
 Leu51 Leu151, Lys154, Asn155 VDW 
    
CDR2 
framework 
Tyr48 His148, Tyr152 VDW 
 Glu55O1 His148N2 H-bond 
 Glu55 His148 VDW 
    
TCR 
framework 
Arg66N1 Asn155O1 H-bond 
 Arg66 Asn155, Glu159 VDW 
    
CDR3 Ser93O Glu160O1 H-bond 
 Ser93 Tyr62, Glu160, Trp164 VDW 
 Asn94O1 Tyr62O H-bond 
 Asn94O Arg61N H-bond 
 Asn94  Arg61, Tyr62, Trp164 VDW 
 Tyr95O Trp156N1 H-bond 
 Tyr95O Arg61N2 H-bond 
 Tyr95 Arg61, Tyr62, Tyr152, Trp156 VDW 
 Gln96 Arg61 VDW 
    
CDR2 Ala50 Gln64 VDW 
 Ser51 Arg67, Gly68 VDW 
 Gly53 Arg41 VDW 
 Thr54O1 Gln64O1, Arg67N1 H-bond 
 Thr54 Gln64, Arg67 VDW 
    
CDR2 
framework 
Tyr48O Arg61N1 H-bond 
 Tyr48 Arg61, Gln64 VDW 
 Thr55 Gln64 VDW 
 Asp56 Gln64 VDW 
    
CDR3 Trp96 Leu65, Gly68, Trp69, Met72 VDW 
 Thr97 Arg61, Leu65 VDW 
 Gly98 Leu65 VDW 
 Glu99O1 Trp69N1 H-bond 
 Glu99O2 Arg9N2, Trp69N1 H-bond 
 Glu99 Arg9, Trp69, Tyr152 VDW 
 Gly100 Glu149, Tyr152 VDW 
 Ser101N Glu149O2 H-bond 
 Ser101 His148, Glu149 VDW 
    
    
 5-OH-DCF MR1 Bond 
 46 
 CL1 Tyr7, Lys43, Tyr62 VDW 
 C9 Tyr7 VDW 
 C8 Trp164 VDW 
 C7 Tyr7, Trp164 VDW 
 C6 Tyr7, Trp156 VDW 
 C5 Tyr7, Trp156 VDW 
 CL Tyr7, Ile96, Trp156 VDW 
 C4 Tyr7 VDW 
 N Tyr7 VDW 
 C3 Tyr62 VDW 
 C10 Tyr62, Tyr95 VDW 
 C11 Arg9, Tyr62, Tyr95, Glu99 VDW 
 C12 Arg9, Tyr62, Glu99 VDW 
 O2 Trp69N1, Glu99O1, Glu99O2 H-bond 
 O2 Arg9, Leu65, Trp69, Glu99 VDW 
 C13 Arg9, Tyr62 VDW 
 C2 Arg9, Tyr62 VDW 
 C1 Tyr62, Leu66 VDW 
 C Tyr7, Ser24, Leu66 VDW 
 O1 Ser24O H-bond 
 O1 Tyr7, Ser24, Leu66 VDW 
 O Arg9N2, Ser24O H-bond 
 O Tyr7, Arg9, Leu66 VDW 
    
    
 5-OH-DCF TCR Bond 
 O2 Glu99O1 O2 H-bonds 
 O2 Glu99 VDW 
 C11 Glu99, Tyr95 VDW 
 C12 Glu99 VDW 
    
    
  Atomic contacts determined using the CCP4i implementation of CONTACT and a cutoff of 4Å.   Van der Waals interactions defined as non-hydrogen bond contact distances of 4Å or less.  Hydrogen bond interactions are defined as contact distances of 3.3Å or less.  Salt bridge interactions are defined as contact distances of 4.5Å or less. 
 
 
 
 
 
