CAROTENOIDS IN GRAPEFRUIT, CITRUS PARADISI
MUSAHIB-UD-DIN KHAN 1 AND G. MACKINNEY
DEPARTMENT OF FOOD TECHNOLOGY, UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA, BERKELEY, CALIFORNIA
Received November 25, 1952
The grapefruit, Citrus paradisi Macf., is not well suited to genetic
studies, but mutants show characteristic changes in the pigmentation of the
fruit flesh. It seemed of interest tlherefore to analyze these changes to see
whether they were in any way comparable with changes known to occur in
the tomato fruit (2). The following sequence of events appears probable:
the shaddock, or pummelo, Citrus maxima (Burm.) Merr., is considered to
be the progenitor of the common Marsh White or colorless grapefruit of
commerce (1). A mutant from Marsh White gave rise to fruit with a pink
flesh, Marsh Pink. Finally bud sports of Marsh Pink gave rise (1, 5) to
fruit deep pink in color, Ruby (syn. Texas Pink and Arizona Red Blush).
The fruit of shaddock has been shown by MATLACK (3) to contain lyco-
pene. Shaddock fruit examined in Los Angeles and in Riverside were found
to be as devoid of color as the Marsh White. One cannot therefore state
whether the grapefruit was derived from pink or colorless shaddock stock.
However, sporting of the white grapefruit resulted in appearance (or re-
appearance) of lycopene and ,8-carotene (Marsh Pink) and this was intensi-
fied by further sporting to Ruby.
Nucellar embryony (production of several saplings from a single seed)
makes it difficult to trace the genetic differences, but the nature of the
carotenoids and the proportions in which they are found in the three cases
is of definite interest in searches for possible pathways in carotenoid bio-
synthesis.
All fruit was purchased fresh under the following trade names, indicative
of locality: Marsh White-Coachella White (Coachella, California); Marsh
Pink-Coachella Pink; Ruby-Texas Pink (Rio Grande Valley), Arizona
Red Blush (Mesa, Arizona).
Depending on the color, between 100 and 500 gm. of the flesh was ex-
haustively extracted with acetone and the carotenoids were transferred to
petroleum ether and chromatographed on magnesium oxide-Hyflo Super Cel
columns, as previously described (2). The absolute amounts of the sepa-
rated individual components were then calculated from the optical densities
at the respective maxima, by use of specific absorption coefficients given by
PORTER and LINCOLN (4). In the case of lycopene, it was convenient to
compute its concentration from values at 503 and 480 mu for the crude
extract assuming a two-component mixture of lycopene and ,8-carotene.
1 Present address: College of Agriculture, Lyallpur, Punjab, Pakistan.
550
 www.plantphysiol.orgon January 27, 2020 - Published by Downloaded from 
Copyright © 1953 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.
BRIEF PAPERS
The absorption curves of the crude extracts in petroleum ether were
clearly indicative of the differences in proportions of the individual carote-
noids. The Ruby (both fromii Texas and Arizona) gave curves showing
characteristic bands, with maxima ca. 503, 472, and 448 iiiu; the shape of
these curves approximated that required by a 1: 1 mixture of lycopene and
fl-carotene. The lycopene band at 503 imiu was not discernible in the crude
extract of Coachella Pink, which gave a three-banded spectrum at 478, 450,
425 mpx, indicativ-e of the predominance of ,8-carotene. The spectrum for
the crude extract of Coachella Wlhite showed a shelf ca. 445 my and three
well-defined bands at 425, 400, and 380 mu.
Iodine catalysis of these crude extracts gave no significant chianges
(Coachella Wlhite) or a slight paling (in the lycopene-containing sailmples)
in the visible portion of the spectrum. The absence of detectable quantities
of poly-cis forms was confirmed by chromatography. Quantitative results
for the major components in these varieties are given in table I.
A total of 11 zones were resolved though they were not all present in
each case. The three pink strains contained predominantly f8-carotene and
TABLE I
PIGMENT CONTENT OF GRAPEFRUIT PULP.
Variety Lycopene /-carotene (-carotene Phytofluene
,Lg./100 gm. pLg./100 gm. 4g./100 gm. 'Ug/100 gm.
Texas Pink 237 207 18 5
Red Blush 176 142 10 20
Coachella Pink 28 129 14 3
Coachella White .... trace 6 9
lycopene, with lesser amiiounts of c-carotene and phytofluene. Traces of
a- and y-carotenes and minor traces of other components were noticed.
Lycopene and fl-carotene were conspicuously lacking in the white strain.
A pale yellow component with an adsorbability close to that of lycopene,
(absorption maxima 445, 428 mnu in petroleum ether), c-carotene and plly-
tofluene comprised the pigment complex.
The sporting of Mlarsh White to MAarsh Pink involves the emergence of
,8-carotene as the imiajor pigment with lesser amounts of lycopene. The sec-
ond miiutation, from AMarsh Pink to Ruby, establishes lycopene as of even
greater significance in the pigment complex. Neither g-carotene nor plhy-
tofluene show fluctuations of the miiagnitude necessary to assumie that tlley
are intermediates in lycopene or carotene syntlheses. We have been informed
that the pink strains are noticeably less colored when grown near the coast,
and more deeply colored in the lhot interior valleys, in Coachiella or Arizona.
The ratios for lycopene, fi- and (-carotenes are 1.14: 1 :0.09 for Texas Pink
fromi the Rio Grande Valley, compared with 1.24:1: 0.07 for Arizona Red
Blush from AMesa, to be contrasted with 0.22: 1: 0.11 for the Coaclhella Pink.
These ratios clearly reflect genetic differences in pigiiientation between Ruby
551
 www.plantphysiol.orgon January 27, 2020 - Published by Downloaded from 
Copyright © 1953 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.
552 PLANT PHYSIOLOGY
and MWarsh Pink. However, since the numiiber and nature of the gene differ-
ences is unknown in these mutants of iMarsh Whlite the evidence cannot yet
be interpreted to favor any particular hyp)othesis as to the miiechanismll of
syntlhesis of ,(-carotene or lycopene.
LITERATURE CITED
1. FRIEND, WX. H. and WOOD, J. F. Citrus varieties for the Lowser Rio
Grande Valley. Texas Agr. Exp. Sta. Bull. 601. 1941.
2. MACKINNEY, G. and JENKIN-S, J. A. Carotenoid differences in toiimatoes.
Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 38: 48-52. 1952.
3. MIATLACK, WV. B. The pigmiient of the India Red Pummiiiielo. Jour. W ash.
Acad. Sci. 24: 385-386. 1934.
4. PORTER, J. W. and LINCOLN, R. E. Lycopersicon selections containing a
hiigh content of carotenes and colorless p)olyenes. Archl. Bioclhem.
27: 390-403. 1950.
5. W EBBER, H. J. and BATCHELOR, L. D. The Citrus Indlustry, Vol. I. The
University Press, Berkeley. 1943.
 www.plantphysiol.orgon January 27, 2020 - Published by Downloaded from 
Copyright © 1953 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.
