Plant Physiol. (1993) 101: 429-434 
A rabidopsis C h I oro p I as t s D i ssi m i I a te L- A r g i n i n e an d 
L-Citrulline for Use as N Source' 
Robert A. Ludwig* 
Department of Biology, Sinsheimer Laboratories, University of California, Santa Cruz, California 95064 
When aseptically grown on defined medium with either L-argi- 
nine, i-citrulline, or nitrate as the sole N source, Arabidopsis plants 
grew and developed normally. Three catabolic activities, i-arginine 
iminohydrolase, i-ornithine carbamoyltransferase, and carbamate 
kinase, were found in stromal fractions of purified Arabidopsis 
chloroplasts. These activities dissimilate i-arginine and/or i-citrul- 
line into i-ornithine, ammonium, bicarbonate, and ATP. In phys- 
iological tests with purified, intact Arabidopsis chloroplasts, i- 
[g~anido-'~C]arginine was rapidly taken up and about 10% was 
decomposed, releasing 'TO2. Therefore, chloroplasts can take up 
and dissimilate i-arginine. In principle, chloroplast arginine dissi- 
milation allows Arabidopsis to use i-arginine and/or i-citrulline as 
general N sources for growth. However, plants rarely encounter 
exogenous i-arginine andjor i-citrulline in amounts exceeding their 
biosynthetic needs. Therefore, i-arginine and L-citrulline might 
serve as endogenous N sources. 
By default, plants do not normally grow on exogenous 
organic N compounds as primary N sources. Rather, plants 
concede organic N to soil microflora, which are avid users of 
organic N and which have high basal metabolic rates. How- 
ever, plants make organic N compounds in specific tissues as 
endogenous N sources for growth. Excess organic N com- 
pounds are made in specific tissues for systemic transport. 
For example, Alnus and Casuarina symbiotic root nodules fix 
Nz and then convert excess fixed N to L-citrulline and L-Arg 
for systemic transport as general N sources (Miettinen and 
Vittanen, 1952; Leaf et al., 1958). As shown by histochemical 
studies, Alnus root mitochondria comprise the site of L- 
citrulline synthesis (Scott et al., 1981). In cyanobacteria, C0,- 
fixing "dark reactions" also yield ~-citrulline (Linko et al., 
1957). Biochemically, L-citrulline is invariably produced by 
coupled CPS and ornithine carbamoyltransferase activities 
(Davis, 1986). How are L-citrulline and L-Arg then used by 
Alnus and Casuarina as systemic N sources, and by cyano- 
bacteria as both N and C sources? 
When bacteria, fungi, and animals dissimilate the L-Arg 
guanido moiety for use as N source, first urea and then 
ammonium are produced. In plants, leaf ammonium is reas- 
similated principally by concerted action of chloroplast GS 
and GOGAT activities. Plants have two GS isoforms; chlo- 
roplast GS is strongly light-inducible, whereas cytosolic GS 
is constitutive (Wallsgrove et al., 1976; Mann et al., 1980). 
Supported by grants to the author from the National Institutes 
of Health (Rol GM-37032) and the National Science Foundation 
(DMB-8805709). 
* e-mail, ludwig e biology. ucsc. edu. 
429 
Unquestionably, chloroplasts mediate high ammonium as- 
similation rates. Arabidopsis chloroplast mutants defective in 
Fd-dependent GOGAT fail to photorespire (Somerville and 
Ogren, 1980). 
Because Alnus and Casuarina N assimilation processes are 
little studied, Arabidopsis plants were tested for growth on 
defined medium with either exogenous L-Arg or L-citrulline 
as the sole N source. A11 plants grew well. In follow- 
up studies with purified Arabidopsis leaf chloroplasts, three 
stromal activities, AIH, OCT, and CK, were identified. 
A11 three activities were present at high levels in light- 
adapted chloroplasts. Together, these three activities dis- 
similate L-Arg or L-citrulline into L-ornithine, ammonium, 
bicarbonate, and ATP. Certainly the ammonium, and possi- 
bly the L-ornithine, served as general N sources. In physio- 
logical tests,purified,intactAra bidopsischloroplastsrapidlytook 
up limiting ~-[guanido-'~C]Arg and decomposed about 10%, 
of it releasing I4CO2. Arabidopsis leaves thus dissimilate 
L-Arg and/or L-citrulline, yielding chloroplastic ammonium, 
which may then be directly reassimilated into L-Gln and 
L-glutamate. 
MATERIALS A N D  METHODS 
Growth of Plants in Defined Medium 
Arabidopsis thaliana ecotype Columbia seeds were surface 
sterilized for 1 h with 1% sodium hypochlorite and 0.5% 
SDS solution and washed three times in sterile water. Resid- 
ual hypochlorite was then chemically removed by soaking 
treated seeds for 2 h in 2 mM ascorbic acid. Seed was sown 
in sterile jars (Magenta Co.) or 2-cm high Petri plates, strewn 
with sterile Perlite mixed with Murashige and Skoog basal 
salts (Murashige and Skoog, 1962) in which ammonium 
nitrate was eliminated, KC1 was substituted for KN03, and 2 
meq L-' of either nitrate, L-citrulline, or L-Arg was then added 
as sole N source. In comparison with the same medium 
supplemented with 30 meq L-' of KN03, in media containing 
2 meq L-' of total N, growth was slower, and thus limited 
by available N. Purified agar (Difco) was also added (0.4% 
w/v) to solidify the medium. Plants were grown in controlled 
environment chambers (Percival) with a 12-h photoperiod at 
22OC under standard humidity and light conditions. 
Abbreviations: AIH, L-arginine iminohydrolase; AS, L-arginino- 
succinate; CK, carbamate kinase; CPS, carbamoylphosphate synthe- 
tase; GOGAT, L-g1utamine:Z-oxoglutarate amidotransferase; GS, L- 
glutamine synthetase; OCT, L-omithine carbamoyltransferase; SDH, 
succinate dehydrogenase. 
 www.plantphysiol.orgon January 13, 2020 - Published by Downloaded from 
Copyright © 1993 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.
430 Ludwig Plant Physiol. Vol. 101, 1993 
Chloroplast lsolation and Purification 
Intact A. thaliana ecotype Columbia chloroplasts were iso- 
lated from illuminated leaves as follows: leaves (20 g) were 
sliced, mixed with 50 mL of ice-cold grinding buffer (10 mM 
sodium pyrophosphate, 5 mM MgC12,2 mM sodium ascorbate, 
and 0.33 M sorbitol, pH 6.5), and homogenized for 5 s 
(Polytron, Brinkmann Instruments). The homogenate was 
filtered through cheesecloth and Miracloth (Calbiochem), and 
quickly centrifuged for 1 min at 8,OOOg in a swinging bucket 
rotor. The pellet was washed with grinding buffer, resus- 
pended in 0.25 mL of resuspension buffer (50 mM Hepes, pH 
7.6, 2 mM EDTA, 1 mM MgCI2, 1 mM MnC12, and 0.33 M 
sorbitol), layered on a 17-mL 50% (w/v) Percoll gradient in 
gradient buffer (50 mM sodium Mops, pH 7.8, 2 mM EDTA, 
0.15% BSA, and 0.33 M sorbitol), and centrifuged for 10 min 
at 5,OOOg in a swinging bucket rotor at 2OC. To form the 
gradient, the Percoll solution in gradient buffer was precen- 
trifuged for 100 min at 10,OOOg in a swinging bucket rotor at 
2OC. The lower (intact) chloroplast band was removed and 
pelleted. Intact chloroplasts were resuspended in 0.5 mL of 
resuspension buffer, examined by light microscopy, and fro- 
zen in 0.05-mL aliquots at -7OOC. 
AIH, OCT, and CK Assays 
AIH activity was assayed as L-Arg-dependent synthesis of 
L-citrulline, derivatized to its oxime, and measured by double- 
beam spectrophotometry (Schimke, 1970a). In these assays, 
0.05 M bis-Tris-C1 buffer, pH 6.5, was substituted for phos- 
phate buffer. Control samples with no added chloroplast 
stromal fraction were subtracted to yield net AIH activity. 
OCT was similarly assayed as L-ornithine and carbamoyl- 
phosphate-dependent synthesis of L-citrulline, which was 
again derivatized to its oxime amd measured by double-beam 
spectrophotometry (Schimke, 1970b). Control samples with 
no added chloroplast stromal fraction were subtracted to yield 
net OCT activity. Total protein (Bradford, 1976) was deter- 
mined for isolated chloroplast stromal fractions. CK 
(ATP:carbamate phosphotransferase) was assayed as follows: 
purified Arabidopsis chloroplasts were assayed for carba- 
moylphosphate and ADP-dependent ATP synthesis coupled 
to firefly luciferase. CK assay mixtures contained 0.01 M 
carbamoylphosphate, 5 mM ADP, and reconstituted firefly 
luciferase-luciferin reagent (Sigma) also containing Gly buffer 
salts, MgS04, EDTA, and human serum albumin; chloroplast 
stromal fraction was added to 4 mg mL-'. Luminometer 
readings were captured at 0.5-s intervals, stored on computer 
disk, and plotted; curves thus include 120 data points per 
min (not shown). After approximately 1 min, firefly luciferase 
reactions become O2 limited (Lundin et al., 1986). 
14C02 Release by lntact Chloroplasts lncubated with 
~- [guanido- '~C]Arg 
Purified, intact Arabidopsis chloroplasts were diluted into 
chloroplast resuspension buffer supplemented with 50 pg 
mL-' of kanamycin sulfate and left on ice for 1 h. To these 
chloroplasts was added 17 WM ~-[guanido-'~C]Arg (58 mCi 
mmol-I); samples (1.0 mL) were then introduced into serum 
bottles (30 mL) each containing a microfuge tube supplied 
with 0.5 mL of 1 N NaOH; serum bottles were stoppered and 
incubated at 3OoC with gentle shaking. At the times indicated, 
1.0 mL of 2 N H2S04 was injected to terminate reactions and 
release COz. Samples were gently shaken overnight, and 
NaOH solutions were analyzed both for I4C decay by liquid 
scintillation spectrometry and for total protein (Bradford, 
1976). 
RESULTS 
Arabidopsis Plants Utilize i-Citrulline and i-Arg as N 
Sources for Growth 
A. thaliana ecotype Columbia plants were grown in sterile 
culture and in defined medium with either nitrate, L-citrul- 
line, or L-Arg as sole N source. By comparison with plants 
grown in similar medium but with nitrate, growth was slow. 
Hence, plant growth at 2 meq L-' of total N under these 
conditions was N limited. AI1 plants grew well, whereas 
plants grown in the same medium with no added N source 
failed to grow (Fig. 1). Up through and including flowering, 
silique formation, and seed yield, no significant differences 
in growth or development with any of the three N sources 
were observed. From subsequent HPLC analyses (data not 
presented), no L-Arg catabolic intermediates, such as L-orni- 
thine, accumulated in conditioned growth medium. There- 
fore, Arabidopsis plants efficiently utilized both L-citrulline 
and L-Arg as N source for growth. 
To facilitate its use as N source, L-Arg might be catabolized 
by an arginase activity to first yield L-ornithine and urea and 
then by a urease activity to yield ammonium. Therefore, 
Arabidopsis leaf tissue homogenate was examined for arginase 
activity by assay for L-Arg-dependent L-ornithine production. 
None was observed. Neither was arginase activity detected 
in purified chloroplast fractions. Therefore, an alternative 
pathway for L-Arg utilization by Arabidopsis plants was 
sought. 
AIH, OCT, and CK Activities Are Present at High Levels in 
Arabidopsis Chloroplasts 
Arabidopsis chloroplasts were purified from light-adapted 
leaves of plants grown in aseptic culture on nitrate as N 
source. Purified chloroplasts were lysed by dilution and then 
assayed for L-Arg catabolic activities. Stromal fractions 
showed three such activities: (a) AIH, which hydrolyzes L- 
Arg by ammoniolysis to yield L-citrulline; (b) OCT, which 
decomposes L-citrulline by phosphorolysis to yield L-orni- 
thine and carbamoylphosphate; and (c) CK, which, in the 
presence of ADP, decomposes carbamoylphosphate into 
ATP, bicarbonate, and ammonium (Table I, Fig. 2). L-Arg- 
dependent L-citrulline production was not stimulated by 
added fumarate and, therefore, did not result from coupled 
AS synthetase and AS lyase activities operating in physiolog- 
ical reverse (see "Discussion"). Formally, because the CK assay 
might also be catalyzed by CPS (see "Discussion"), any in 
vivo catabolic and/or anabolic context cannot be inferred 
from these results alone. Even though assay conditions for 
chloroplast AIH, OCT, and CK were not optimized, high 
activities (>0.1 pmol min-' mg-' soluble protein) were ob- 
served. Because it did not accumulate in the plant growth 
 www.plantphysiol.orgon January 13, 2020 - Published by Downloaded from 
Copyright © 1993 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.
Chloroplast L-Arg Dissimilation 431
medium, L-ornithine might also be further catabolized (not
tested).
Because Arabidopsis, like fungi (Davis, 1986), may also
possess a mitochondrial OCT isoform, purified chloroplast
fractions were analyzed for SDH activity (Hedrick and
Smith, 1968), indicative of mitochondrial contamination.
No SDH activity (<1 nmol min"1 rng~' protein) was detected.
Therefore, OCT, AIH, and CK activities were attributed to
chloroplasts.
Arabidopsis Chloroplasts Take Up L-[guanido-14C]Arg and
Release 14CO2
To test whether the Arabidopsis chloroplast AIH, OCT, and
CK activities constituted a catabolic pathway, intact Arabi-
dopsis chloroplasts, purified from leaf tissue of plants adapted
to continuous light, were incubated with L-[guanido-14C]-
Arg in the dark. Chloroplasts rapidly took up radiolabeled L-
Arg and released 14CO2 (Fig. 3). In the absence of added
kanamycin sulfate, a chloroplast protein synthesis inhibitor,
this behavior was erratic (data not presented). In the presence
of 50 /ug mL~' kanamycin, however, approximately 10% was
decomposed, as evidenced by 14CO2 release, at rates approx-
Table I. Purified Arabidopsis leaf chloroplast AIH (reaction }), OCT
(reaction 2), and CK (reaction 3) activities
Chloroplast Function
Thylakoid Stromal
L-Arginine + H2O — > L-citrulline + NH3
L-Citrulline + Pi <-» L-ornithine + carba-
moylphosphate
Carbamoylphosphate + H2O + ADP — >
NH3 + HCOJ + ATP
Sum: i-arginine + 2H2O + ADP, Pi ->
L-ornithine + 2NH3 + HCOJ + ATP
<0.1J 4.35"
<0.1' 1.75'
1.20b
l L-citrulline min ' mg 'protein. ATP min ' mg
protein.
imately linear with incubation time (30 nmol min"1 mg"1
protein). Intact chloroplast preparations showed quantitative
uptake of limiting (17 ^M) u-Arg, measured as relative radio-
label remaining in low-speed supernatants (data not pre-
sented). Nevertheless, decarboxylative activity might have
occurred in some broken chloroplasts. To test this alternative,
L-[guanido-14C]Arg-dependent CO2 release was retested with
Figure 1. Arabidopsis plants grown in aseptic culture and on defined medium with selected N sources: A, L-Arg; B, L-
citrulline; C, no N source; D, nitrate. Representative plants were photographed 10 d postgermination.
 www.plantphysiol.orgon January 13, 2020 - Published by Downloaded from 
Copyright © 1993 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.
432 Ludwig Plant Physiol. Vol. 101, 1993 
0.4 
Y 0.3 o 
= 0.2 
O m 
(u 
0 . q  
O 
O 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 
time (min) 
Figure 2. CK (ATP:carbamate phosphotransferase) activity in puri- 
fied Arabidopsis chloroplast extracts. Stromal fractions from purified, 
intact Arabidopsis chloroplasts were assayed for carbamoylphos- 
phate- and ADP-dependent ATP synthesis by coupling to’firefly 
luciferase. Luminometer readings were captured at 0.5-s intervals, 
stored on computer disk, and plotted; curves thus  include 120 data 
points per min (not shown). After approximately 1 min, firefly 
luciferase reactions become O2 limited (Lundin et al., 1986). Data 
points represent net carbamoylphosphate-dependent ATP synthe- 
sis per milligram of stromal protein in the presence (upper curve) 
or in the absence (lower curve) of added chloroplast stromal frac- 
tion. From regression analysis, the data in the upper curve yielded 
an initial velocity of 1.2 pmol ATP min-’ mg-’ protein. 
deliberate lysis of chloroplasts by dilution into nonosmoti- 
cally protective buffer. Similar results were obtained. Because 
no stimulation occurred with deliberately lysed chloroplasts, 
physiological activity was attributed to intact chloroplasts. 
Whether chloroplast L-Arg catabolism was either photore- 
gulated or stimulated by exogenous substrate(s) was not 
tested. 
In steady-state limitation, chloroplast L-Arg is avidly assim- 
ilated both by ribosylation, to yield aminoacyl-tRNA (for 
protein synthesis), and by decarboxylation, to yield agmatine 
(for polyamine synthesis). Thus, chloroplast anabolic reac- 
tions might favorably compete with catabolic reactions for 
limiting L-Arg. At the leve1 of primary control, physiological 
rates of L-Arg synthesis in fungi and animals are limited by 
mitochondrial ATP and ammonium availability (Davis, 
1986). Because plant leaves normally experience steady-state 
ammonium limitation, chloroplast L-Arg assimilation should 
predominate. Hence, most ~-[guanido-’~C]Arg taken up by 
chloroplasts under limiting conditions must enter anabolic 
DISCUSSION 
Because Arabidopsis  plants grow normally on exogenous L- 
citrulline and/or L-Arg as the sole N source, by implication, 
pools. 
the three L-Arg catabolic activities discovered in leaf chloro- 
plasts might play an important role in the use of these amino 
acids, whether taken up exogenously or generated endoge- 
nously. Through concerted activity of these three enzymes, 
each dissimilated L-citrulline and/or L-Arg equivalent would 
yield one L-ornithine equivalent, one (for L-citrulline) or two 
(for L-Arg) ammonium equivalents, and one bicarbonate 
equivalent (Fig. 4), which would be dehydrated to yield COz 
and water by the stromal carbonic anhydrase activity. In the 
presence of 2-ketoglutarate, ammonium would drive L-glu- 
tamate synthesis via concerted chloroplast GS and GOGAT 
activities (Wallsgrove et al., 1980; Somerville and Ogren, 
1980). 
What is the physiological significance of L-Arg and/or L- 
citrulline catabolism to normally N-limited plants, such as 
Arabidopsis? Relative chloroplast L-Arg and/or t-citrulline 
anabolic and catabolic rates might be subject to primary 
physiological control, in which case one set of enzymes might 
function reversibly. The four L-Arg biosynthetic activities are, 
respectively, Arg-specific CPS (CPS-A), OCT, AS synthetase, 
and AS lyase (Fig. 4). In fungi and animals, the first two L- 
Arg biosynthetic activities are usually mitochondrial, the last 
two cytosolic (Davis, 1986). Fumarate produced by AS lyase 
activity is hydrated and then oxidized to yield oxaloacetate, 
which then transaminates with L-glutamate (exported from 
mitochondria in animals and fungi but, presumably, from 
chloroplasts in plants), regenerating L-aspartate. 
In soybean cotyledons, the universal L-Arg biosynthetic 
pathway was confirmed by physiological radiolabeling stud- 
ies (Micallef and Shelp, 1989). However, the explicit com- 
partmentation of these four higher plant enzymes remains 
unclear. Because sequestered carbamoylphosphate pools are 
used exclusively to make either L-Arg or pyrimidines (Davis, 
1986), precisely where, in plant cells, ammonium is assimi- 
lated as carbamoylphosphate is important. In severa1 dico- 
1.u I 
““iI_ O O 10 20 30 40 50 
time (min) 
Figure 3. l4CO, release by intact Arabidopsis chloroplasts incubated 
with ~-[guanido-’~C]Arg (mean value of duplicate experimental 
samples). 
 www.plantphysiol.orgon January 13, 2020 - Published by Downloaded from 
Copyright © 1993 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.
Chloroplast L-Arg Dissimilation 
- NH, 1 Mitochondrion 
433 
Chloroplest 
stroma 
Ornithine Arginine Glutamate 2-KG 
\f \/ 
A A Glutamate 2-KG 
Arginine 
Malate 
Fumarate 
Argininosuccinate I &  I 
Ornithine Citrulline Cytosol 
\/ 
Ornithine Citrulline 
Figure 4. Hypothetical endogenous L-citrulline 
and/or L-Arg shuttle from mitochondria to chlo- 
roplasts, comprising: mitochondrial CPS-A ( I ) ,  
anabolic OCT (2), cytosolic AS synthetase (3), 
AS lyase (4), chloroplast stromal AIH (S) ,  cata- 
bolic OCT (6) ,  CK (7), L-Gln synthetase @), and 
Fd-dependent GOGAT (9). Accessory activities 
include: mitochondrial fumarase (10), cytosolic 
malate dehydrogenase (1 I ) ,  and cytosolic L- 
asparate aminotransferase (1 2). Notes: if fumar- 
ase activity is exclusively mitochondrial, fumar- 
ate and L-malate might be antiported across the 
mitochondrial inner membrane. The driving 
force of this shuttle is a mitochondrial ammo- 
nium or L-Cin supply (see text). If this shuttle 
involves only L-citrulline synthesis (decoupled 
from L-Arg synthesis), then reactions 3,4, 5, 10, 
11, and 12 are bypassed. In theory, this shuttle 
might metabolically couple mitochondria and 
chloroplasts either in the same cell or in dis- 
parate tissues, in which case L-Arg and/or L- 
citrulline are systematically transported. 
tyledonous plants, leaf chloroplast CPS (CPS-P) activities 
have been reported. Because this CPS-P is associated with 
aspartate carbamoyltransferase, pyrimidines seem to be syn- 
thesized in chloroplasts (Shibata et al., 1986). Might chloro- 
plast CPS also mediate L-Arg synthesis? Pisum sativum (pea) 
has been reported to possess a single CPS activity with hybrid 
catalytic properties (Ruiter and Kolloffel, 1982). 
Alternatively, the three observed Arabidopsis chloroplast 
activities might play anabolic, not catabolic, roles. In that 
case, L-Arg and L-citrulline are used as N sources in some 
other way. Arabidopsis chloroplasts may well sustain de novo 
L-Arg biosynthesis. Although chloroplast OCT catalyzes a 
freely reversible reaction in extracts, it might operate strictly 
biosynthetically in vivo. Likewise, the carbamoylphosphate 
and ADP-dependent ATP synthesis observed in chloroplast 
extracts might be due to a CPS catalytic subunit, assayed in 
physiological reverse. Heretofore, chloroplast CPS activity 
has been considered CPS-P, coupled to aspartate carbamoyl- 
transferase activity for pyrimidine synthesis (Shibata et al., 
1986). However, observed CPS activity was completely in- 
dependent of added L-Gln (Shibata et al., 1986), unprece- 
dented for a CPS-P activity. Lacking further information, this 
chloroplast activity might be considered a degenerate CPS, 
able to drive both L-Arg and pyrimidine synthesis. 
However, the AIH activity reported here is unlikely to be 
anabolic. The universally conserved AS synthetase and AS 
lyase activities are exclusively anabolic (Davis, 1986). In 
Arabidopsis chloroplast extracts, because added fumarate did 
not stimulate L-Arg-dependent L-citrulline production, that 
coupled, reversible AS synthetase and AS lyase activities 
constitute the observed AIH activity is highly improbable. 
Moreover, because chloroplasts have no known fumarate 
source, any in vivo reversibility is unlikely to extend to all 
four L-Arg biosynthetic reactions. Therefore, from our results 
chloroplasts carry at least one, L-Arg-specific, uniquely cata- 
bolic activity. 
As a third alternative, chloroplasts might carry both L-Arg 
catabolic and anabolic activities, including isoforms exclusive 
to each pathway. In Pseudomonas bacteria, which can both 
assimilate and dissimilate L-Arg in one compartment, separate 
and distinct activities so participate (Wauven et al., 1984). 
Although they express the universally conserved four L-Arg 
biosynthetic activities, Pseudomonas bacteria also use AIH, 
catabolic OCT (with quite different kinetic properties), and 
 www.plantphysiol.orgon January 13, 2020 - Published by Downloaded from 
Copyright © 1993 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.
434 Ludwig Plant Physiol. Vol. 101, 1993 
CK activities to anaerobically dissimilate L-Arg, as well as use 
a succinylation-dependent pathway to aerobically dissimilate 
L- Arg. Anaerobically, the former three catabolic activities 
drive ATP synthesis at relatively high in vivo energy charge 
and thus allow the bacteria to use L-Arg as an energy source. 
Leaf chloroplasts of nonnodulated plants like Arabidopsis 
might indeed catabolize L-Arg and/or L-citrulline, as observed 
here, even when plants are grown on nitrate as the exogenous 
N source. If so, is there an endogenous source of steady- 
state, excess L-Arg and/or L-citrulline for use as catabolic 
substrate? At the leve1 of primary control, L-Arg biosynthetic 
rates in fungi and animals are limited by mitochondrial ATP 
and ammonium availability. Because plants normally grow 
in ammonium-limited conditions, L-Arg biosynthesis rates 
would reflect this limitation. However, plant tissues do ex- 
perience physiological conditions of intense ammonium flux 
in mitochondria, such as during photorespiration. Likewise, 
in N2-fixing Alnus and Casuarina root nodules, mitochondria 
synthesize L-citrulline from fixed N (ammonium) in large 
amounts and for export to other tissues (Leaf et al., 1958; 
Scott et al., 1981). In nonnodulated plants, might leaf mito- 
chondria also produce L-citrulline in response to a strong 
mitochondrial ammonium flux, such as during photorespir- 
atory Gly combustion? If so, then leaf mitochondrial carba- 
moylphosphate, and thus L-citrulline and/or L-Arg, might be 
made at rates in excess of steady-state biosynthetic needs. 
The excess might be dissimilated by chloroplasts and thus 
shuttle COz, as well as ammonium, between leaf mitochon- 
dria and chloroplasts (Fig. 4). As a physiological rationale, 
this shuttle might then metabolically channel C 0 2 ,  produced 
by other mitochondrial oxidations, to chloroplasts for efficient 
reassimilation. 
ACKNOWLEDCMENTS 
I thank Harry Beevers, Rowland Davis, Dieter Haas, Lincoln Taiz, 
and Dick Weiss for helpful discussions. 
Received June 22, 1992; accepted October 5, 1992. 
Copyright Clearance Center: 0032-O889/93/lOl/0429/06. 
LITERATURE ClTED 
Bradford MM (1976) A rapid and sensitive method for the quanti- 
tation of microgram quantities of protein using the principle of 
protein-dye binding. Ana1 Biochem 72  248-254 
Davis RH (1986) Compartmental and regulatory mechanisms in the 
arginine pathways of Neurospora crassa and Saccharomyces cerevis- 
iae. Microbiol Rev 50: 280-313 
Hedrick JL, Smith J (1968) Size and charge isomer separation and 
estimation of molecular weights of proteins by disc gel electropho- 
resis. Arch Biochem Biophys 126 155-164 
Leaf G, Gardner IC, Bond G (1958) Observations on the composition 
and metabolism of the nitrogen-fixing root nodules of A l n k  J Exp 
Bot 9: 320-331 
Linko P, Holm-Hansen O, Bassham JA, Calvin M (1957) Formation 
of radioactive citrulline during photosynthetic CI4O2 fixation by 
blue-green algae. J Exp Bot 8: 147-156 
Lundin A, Hasenson M, Persson J, Pousette A (1986) Estimation of 
biomass in growing cell lines by adenosine triphosphate assay. 
Methods Enzymoll33 27-42 
Mann AF, Fenten PA, Stewart GR (1980) Tissue localization of 
barley glutamine synthetase isoenzymes. FEBS Lett 110: 265-267 
Micallef BJ, Shelp BJ (1989) Arginine metabolism in developing 
soybean cotyledons. Plant Physiol 9 0  624-634 
Miettinen JK, Vittanen AI (1952) The free amino acids in the leaves, 
roots, and root nodules of the alder. Physiol Plant 5: 540-557 
Murashige T, Skoog F (1962) A revised medium for rapid growth 
and bioassays with tobacco tissue cultures. Physiol Plant 15: 
473-497 
Ruiter H de, Kolloffel C (1982) Arginine metabolism in pea seeds. 
Plant Physiol70 313-315 
Schimke RT (1970a) Arginine deiminase. Methods Enzymol 17A. 
Schimke RT (1970b) Ornithine carbamoyltransferase. Methods En- 
zymol17A: 295-297 
Scott A, Gardner IC, McNally SF (1981) Localization of citrulline 
synthesis in the alder root nodule and implications for nitrogen 
fixation. Plant Cell Rep 1: 21-22 
Shibata H, Ochiaia H, Sawa Y, Miyoshi S (1986) Localization of 
carbamoylphosphate synthetase and aspartate carbamoyltransfer- 
ase in chloroplasts. Plant Physiol 80  126-129 
Somerville CR, Onren WL (1980) lnhibition of Dhotosvnthesis in 
310-313 
Arabidopsis thali&a mutants lacGng leaf glutam'ate sykthase. Na- 
ture 286: 257-259 
Wallsgrove RM, Keys AJ, Bird IF, Cornelius MJ, Lea PJ, Miflin BJ 
(1976) The location of glutamine synthetase in leaf cells and its 
role in the reassimilation of ammonia released in photorespiring 
barley and pea leaves. J Exp Bot 31: 1005-1018 
Wauven C van der, Pierard A, Kley-Raumann M, Haas D (1984) 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa mutants affected in anaerobic growth on 
arginine: evidence for a four-gene cluster encoding the arginine 
deiminase pathway. J Bacteriol 160 928-934 
 www.plantphysiol.orgon January 13, 2020 - Published by Downloaded from 
Copyright © 1993 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.
