Plant Cell Reports (1988) 7:1-4 
Alternative final steps in berberine biosynthesis 
in Coptisjaponica ell cultures 
Plant Cell 
Reports 
© Springer-Verlag 1988 
E. Galneder 1 M. Rueffer 1, G. Wanner 1, 2, M. Tabata 1, 3, and M. H. Zenk 1 
1 Lehrstuhl tar Pharmazeutische Biologie der Universitfit Mfinchen, Karlstrasse 29, D-8000 Mt~nchen 2,Federal Republic of Germany 
2 Botanisches Institut der Universitfit Miinchen, Menzinger Strasse 67, D-8000 Manchen 19, Federal Republic of Germany 
3 Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606, Japan 
Received October 30, 1987 - Communicated byK. Hahlbrock 
ABSTRACT 
In Coptis japonica cel l  cultures an alternat ive path- 
way has been discovered which leads from (S)-tetra- 
hydrocolumbamine via (S)-canadine to berberine. The 
two enzymes involved have been par t ia l l y  pur i f ied.  
(S)-Tetrahydrocolumbamine is stereospecif ical ly 
transformed into (S)-canadine under formation of the 
methylenedioxy bridge in ring A. This new enzyme was 
named (S)-canad/ne synthase. (S)-Canadine in turn is 
stereospecif ical ly dehydrogenated to berberine by an 
oxidase, (S)-canadine oxidase (COX), which was 
par t ia l l y  puri f ied (25-fold). This enzyme has many 
physical properties in common with the already known 
(S)-tetrahydroprotoberberine oxidase from Berberis 
but grossly d i f fers  from the la t ter  enzyme in its co- 
factor requirement (Fe) and /ts substrate specif- 
i c i ty .  Neither (S)-norreticul ine nor (S)-scoulerine 
serves as substrate for the Coptis enzyme, while both 
substrates are readi ly oxidized by the Berberis 
enzyme. The four terminal enzymes catalyz/ng the 
pathway from (S)-ret icul ine to berberine are housed 
in Berberis as well as in Coptis in smooth vesicles 
with a density of p = 1.14 g/ml. These vesicles have 
been enriched and characterized by electron micro- 
scopy. 
INTRODUCTION 
Berberine is the f i r s t  plant alkaloid whose bio- 
synthesis is completely known at the enzyme level 
(Zenk et a l . ,  1985). Recently the early steps in the 
pathway leading from tyrosine to ret icu l ine ,  the 
universal precursor for isoquinoline alkaloids, had 
to be revised (Stadler et a l . ,  1987) in that norcoc- 
laurine was recognized as the f i r s t  alkaloid inter-  
mediate in ret icu l ine biosynthesis (Loeff ler et a l . ,  
1987). The berberine pathway has been worked out 
mainly using cel l  cultures of d i f ferent  Berberis 
species as the experimental material. Cell suspension 
cultures of Coptis japonica, on the other hand, have 
been optimized to such a degree that the commercial 
production of berberine seems now feasable (see 
Fuj ita and Tabata, 1987). In order to understand the 
alkaloid biosynthesis at the biochemical and cyto- 
logical level in this tissue we set out to compare 
the pathway for berberine formation in Coptis with 
the established pathway in our Berberis system. This 
study was jus t i f i ed  due to the report of Yamada and 
Okada (1985) on a crude enzyme from Coptis which 
converted (S)-tetrahydroberberine (= (S)-canadine) to 
berberine. This unpurified enzyme was st r ik ing ly  
d i f ferent  from the (S)-tetrahydroprotoberberine 
oxidase (STOX) reported from our laboratory (Amann et 
a l . ,  1984) in that the Coptis enzyme dehydrogenated 
only (S)-canadine while other tetrahydroprotober- 
berines were reported to be inactive. In further 
contrast to the STOX enzyme, the i r  enzyme did not 
produce hydrogen peroxide but rather H20 as one of 
the reaction products. Our analysis of the Coptis 
system reported here led to the surprising result 
that the terminal two steps in the biosynthesis of 
berberine in 8erberis and Coptis are biochemically 
completely d i f ferent  while similar at the cytological 
level.  
MATERIAL and METHODS 
CELL CULTURES - B. stolonifera was cult ivated in 
Linsmaier and Skoog (1965) medium as previously 
described (Amann et a l . ,  1986), and C. japonica under 
conditions as given by Fukui et al .  (1982). 
ENZYME PREPARATION - Cells of C. japonica were 
harvested after 10 days of cul t ivat ion and frozen in 
l iquid nitrogen. Typically 100 g fresh weight were 
thawed while s t i r r ing  in 200 ml 10 mM phosphate 
buffer (pH 7.5, 5 mM B-mercaptoethanol). After 30 min 
the mass was pressed through cheese-cloth and 
centrifuged for 10 min at 13 500 x g. The clear 
supernatant was applied to an XAD-2 column (XAD-2, 
0.31 - I mm, Serva Heidelberg, column: 2.5 x 15 cm, 
flow rate: 100 ml/h), equil ibrated with 10 mM phos- 
phate buffer (pH 7.5, 5 mM 3-mercapotethanol). The 
eluate of the column (230 ml) was applied to a DEAE- 
Sephacel column (Pharmacia, 2.5 x 18 cm, flow rate 
35 ml/h) equil ibrated with the buffer described 
above. The protein was eluted with a l inear gradient 
of KCI (0 - I M KCI, 8 h) in fractions of 5 ml. The 
oxidase was detected in fractions 125 - 142 (92 ml) 
which were pooled and dialyzed against 10 mM phos- 
phate buffer (pH 7.5, 5 mM 3-mercaptoethanol). The 
dialyzed enzyme solution was applied to a QAE-coiumn 
(QAE fast flow, FPLC-system Pharmacia, 1.0 x 10 cm) 
at a flow rate of I ml/min equi l ibrated with the 
standard phosphate buffer. The enzyme was eluted with 
a l inear gradient from 0 - 0.3 M KOI (70 min, flow 
rate: I ml/min) in I ml fractions. The enzyme was 
detected in fractions 44 - 64 (20 ml), pooled and 
dialyzed again against the standard buffer. The 
resulting protein solution was bound to a red A- 
column (Procion red (Ciba-Geigy) bound to TSK-gel 
(Merck)) at a flow rate of 15 ml/h (column: 1.5 x 30 
cm, equil ibrated with standard buffer).  The protein 
was incubated on the column for 2 h and afterwards 
the enzyme could be eluted with the equi l ibrat ion 
Offprint requests to: M. H. Zenk 
buffer (36 ml), about a 25-fold pur i f i cat ion  resulted 
with a specif ic ac t iv i ty  of 6.5 pkat/mg. The mole- 
cular weights of the enzymes were determined.by gel 
f i l t ra t ion  HPLC (G-3000 SW, LKB, 21.5 x 600 mm). The 
isoelectr ic  point was determined by preparative iso- 
e lectr ic  focusing in a granulated f la t  agarose gel 
from pH 4.5 - 6.0 (LKB).Protein determinations were 
performed according to Bradford (1976). 
ENZYME ASSAYS - The reaction mixture (250 ~i) 
included 25 ~moles borate buffer (pH 8.9), I nmole 
(R,S)-[8,14-trit ium]-canadine (20 000 cpm) and enzyme 
(up to 300 ~g protein).  The assay mixture was 
incubated for 20 min at 30°C and the reaction termin- 
ated by addition of 300 ~i dextran coated charcoal 
(I g/10 ml). The suspension was centrifuged for 5 min 
in an Eppendorf centrifuge and an al iquot of 250 ~I 
removed for sc in t i l l a t ion  counting (Rotiszint 22, 
Roth). The optical assay was performed using the 
stereochemically pure isoquinoline alkaloids accord- 
ing to Amann et al.  (1986). (S)-Canadine synthase was 
assayed as stated previously (Rueffer and Zenk, 
1985), however, using (R,S)-[3-methoxy-tr it ium]- 
tetrahydrocolumbamine. 
VESICLE ISOLATION AND ELECTRON MICROSCOPY - The 
vesicles were isolated by isopycnic sucrose density 
gradient centr i fugation and characterized by electron 
microscopy according to Amann et aI. (1986). Atomic 
absorption spectroscopy (graphite column mode) was 
performed on a Perkin Elmer 1100B instrument. 
RESULTS 
ENZYMOLOGY OF BERBERINE FORMATION - C. japon ica  cel ls  
grown under conditions of high berberine production 
were used as an enzyme source. Crude protein extracts 
were analyzed for  the i r  ab i l i ty  to oxidize a var iety 
of tetrahydroprotoberberines. Using the very sens- 
i t i ve  t r i t ium removal assay as well as the optical 
assay i t  could be shown that (S)-canadine was by far  
the best substrate (100%) followed by (S)-scoulerine 
(16%), (R,S)-tetrahydrojatrorrhiz ine (15%), (R,S)- 
coreximine (7%), (R,S)-stylopine and (R,S)-tetra- 
hydrocolumbamine (each 6%), and by (R,S)-tetrahydro- 
palmatine (5%). Tetrahydroprotoberberines with (R)- 
configuration were not u t i l i zed  as substrates. The 
presence of various protoberberines in th is  crude and 
colored protein extract may have influenced the 
oxidase ac t iv i ty  in a negative way and the results 
have to be interpreted more in a qua l i tat ive  manner. 
Regardless of th is  potential interference, the 
experiment demonstrates the presence of oxidase 
ac t iv i ty  s imi lar  to the one previously observed in 
Berber i s .  There was, however, one major difference in 
the substrate spec i f i c i ty .  While the Berber i s  oxidase 
catalyzes the dehydrogenation of (S)-norret icul ine 
with high ac t iv i ty  to 1,2-dehydronorreticuline (Amann 
et a i . ,  1987), the coptis enzyme c lear ly  did not 
transform th is  substrate. This behaviour as well as 
the observations of Yamada and Okada (1985) made i t  
l i ke ly  that the Coptis oxidase was d i f ferent  from the 
Berber i s  enzyme. In order to investigate th is  hypo- 
thesis we set out to pur i fy  th is  enzyme. In a three 
step procedure the canadine dehydrogenating enzyme 
from Coptis could be pur i f ied about 25-fold. One 
major obstacle in pur i fy ing the enzyme was i ts  lab i l -  
i ty .  The enzyme has a hal f  l i fe  of about 2 days in 
d i lute  solut ion. During the pur i f i cat ion  procedure i t  
was noticed that the enzyme exists in two forms, a 
high molecular form (ca. 150 kD) and a low one (ca. 
58 kD). Both enzyme act iv i t ies  were isolated and 
tested for  the i r  substrate spec i f i c i t ies .  
As shown in Table I ,  both enzyme forms catalyzed 
exclusively the oxidation of (S)-canadine and not of 
(R)-canadine. Stylopine and tetrahydrocolumbamine 
were dehydrogenated as we11, while scoulerine and 
norret icul ine were not. The 58 kD enzyme which was 
present in the cei ls  predominantly (ca. 60%) was 
further  characterized and compared to the enzyme from 
Berberis wilsoniae. 
Enzyme act iv i ty  in % 
Substrate 155 kD 58 kD 
(s)-Canadine 100 100 
(R)-Canadine 0 0 
(R,S)-Stylopine 11 26 
(R,S)-Tetrahydrocolumbamine 5 5 
(R,S)-Scoulerine 0 0 
(R,S)-Norreticuline 0 0 
Table 1 Substrate specificity of the high and low mole- 
cular weight forms of Coptis (S)-canadine oxidase. The 
assay conditions were given in material and methods. 
Both enzymes are very similar~ in the i r  physical 
properties they show the same pH (Berber i s :  pH 8.9, 
Coptis: pH 8.7) and temperature optimum (40°C), they 
both occur in a higher and lower M~ form, they have 
similar isoelectr ic  points (pH 5.7/pH 5.3), they 
catalyze the dehydrogenation of only the (S)-forms of 
the i r  substrates, they both exist  in specif ic vesic- 
les (see below), and the products of the reaction are 
the quaternary protoberberine and hydrogen peroxide. 
One difference is, however, while the oxidase from 
Berber i s  is a f lav in  enzyme (Amann et a l . ,  1984), the 
Coptis enzyme c lear ly  contains iron as shown by 
atomic absorption spectroscopy of the electrophoret- 
ica l Iy  pure enzyme and by i ts  inh ib i t ion  by ortho- 
phenanthroline (50% inh ib i t ion  at 0.05 mM), a behav- 
iour which is not shown by the Berberis enzyme. The 
major difference, however, is seen in the substrate 
spec i f i c i ty  of both enzymes. While the Berber i s  
enzyme is fu l l y  active towards (S)-scoulerine, (S)- 
canadine and (S)-norret icul ine,  the Coptis enzyme 
catalyzes only the oxidation of (S)-canadine. We 
therefore propose to cal l  th is  enzyme (S)-canadine 
oxidase (COX) or (S)-tetrahydroberberine oxidase 
(Yamada and Okada, 1985), in contrast to the Berber i s  
enzyme which we have termed (S)-tetrahydroprotober- 
berine oxidase (STOX) because of i ts  much wider 
substrate range. 
Having now established that (S)-canadine is the 
preferred substrate for  the Coptis oxidase catalyzing 
the last step in berberine formation, the question 
arises at which stage of biosynthetic events is the 
methylenedioxy group present in berberine formation. 
I t  has been established beyood any doubt that in the 
Berber i s  system the introduction of the methylene- 
dioxy group occurs at the quaternary alkaloid level 
and columbamine is transformed into berberine by 
action of berberine synthase as a last step in i ts  
biosynthesis (Rueffer and Zenk, 1985). Due to the 
substrate spec i f i c i ty  of the oxidase (COX) the Coptis 
enzyme introducing the methylenedioxy group must act 
on the corresponding tetrahydroprotoberberine, namely 
(S)-tetrahydrocolumbamine, thus forming (S)-canadine. 
I t  has been previously known that the terminal steps 
of berberine biosynthesis are located exclusively in 
specif ic vesicles contained in the cei ls  of protober- 
berine containing plants (Amann et a l . ,  1986), none 
of these enzymes are present in the cytosoI. There- 
fore vesicles were isolated from both Berberis stolo- 
ni fera as well as from Coptis japonica employing the 
method of Amann et al .  (1986). Incubation of the 
enzyme with columbamine after breaking the vesicle 
membranes by br ie f  freezing and thawing showed in the 
case of Berberis that th is  was the substrate for  the 
methylenedioxy bridge-forming berberine synthase 
(20.1 pkat/mg protein).  Columbamine, however, was 
absolutely not transformed by the Coptis vesicular 
enzyme. Coptis, however, transformed with equal 
eff icacy tetrahydrocolumbamine to canadine (24.6 
pkat/mg protein).  This new enzyme which is contained 
in the Coptis vesicles catalyzes a new reaction in 
that the methylenedioxy bridge is introduced at the 
te r t ia ry ,  tetrahydro stage. We name th is  enzyme (S)- 
canadine synthase. Since in the case of Berberis the 
four terminal enzymes involved in berberine bio- 
synthesis, the berberine bridge enzyme, scoulerine-9- 
O-methyltransferase, as well as STOX and berberine 
synthase are located in specif ic  vesicles (Zenk et 
a l . ,  1985), we investigated whether th is  is also the 
case with Coptis. Vesicles were isolated from Bo 
stoloni fera and from C. japonica and a l l  four enzymes 
analyzed in these preparations. As demonstrated in 
Fig. I ,  both in Berberis and Coptis vesicles are 
present which have a density of p = 1.14 g/ml, as 
determined by sucrose density gradient centr i fug- 
ation. These vesicles isolated from both species 
contain in each case the four terminal enzymes trans- 
forming (S) - ret icu l ine to berberine. 
( i! i ( 
loo-~ A , '~  B ~'~ I 
BERBERIS /~ ~,'@ I COPTIS ~,  16o 
8o4 ,... H-; I i¶  I " ~  .,'~ :ll~ I 
20- I  ,--, ,n  ,,, u , :" 
:1 /f I I / / ; / l ' t ' °  
lo Is 2o 2s lo us 2o 2s 
Vo lume (ml )  
Fig. 1 Typical fractionation profile of a sucrose density 
gradient separation of vesicles isolated from A. Berberis: 
Berberine bridge enzyme (o- -o) ;  (S ) -scou ler ine -9 -0 -  
methyltransferase (F-l.o []]); (S)-tetrahydroprotoberberine 
oxidase (x--x); berberine synthase (o-o); sucrose concent-  
ration (A-A). B. Coptis: Berberine bridge enzyme (o--o); 
(S)-scoulerine-9-0-methyltransferase ( [ ] . ,  []]); (S)-canadine 
synthase (o-o); (S)-canadine oxidase (x--x); sucrose 
concentration (A-A). 
Vesicles from Berberis as well as from Coptis contain 
the berberine bridge enzyme, thus catalyzing the 
formation of (S)-scoulerine from (S) - ret icu l ine .  The 
(R)-enantiomer of re t i cu l ine  is not used as substrate 
in e i ther system. Also present in both vesicular 
bands is the SAM: (S)-scoulerine-9-O-methyltrans- 
ferase, y ie ld ing (S)-tetrahydrocolumbamine from (S)- 
scoulerine. Therefore, in both plant species these 
two steps leading from (S) - ret icu l ine to (S)-tetra- 
hydrocolumbamine are the same. After th is  inter-  
mediate, the pathways diverge. While in Berberis 
tetrahydrocolumbamine is f i r s t  oxidized and then the 
methylenedioxy bridge introduced, in Coptis the 
methylenedioxy forming enzyme acts on the tetrahydro- 
protoberberine f i r s t  to y ie ld  (S)-canadine which is 
subsequently oxidized to the f ina l  product of both 
pathways, berberine. 
I t  has previously been found by electron microscopic 
observation (Yamamoto et a l . ,  1986) that berberine 
producing strains of C, japonica contain an abundance 
of cytoplasmic vesicles 0.5 - I ~m in diameter. These 
vesicles are obviously s imi lar  or identical  with 
those vesicles isolated from Berber i s  and three other 
alkaloid containing members of d i f ferent  plant 
famil ies which have been shown to contain exclusively 
a l l  the enzymes necessary for  protoberberine formati- 
on (Amann et a l . ,  1986). We therefore attempted here 
a direct  comparison of the funct iona l ly  characterized 
vesicles (see above) of C. japonica with those 
isolated from Bo stolonifera both of which have a 
density of p = 1.14 g/ml. Electron micrographs of the 
vesicle f ract ion are shown in Fig. 2. 
As can be seen, there is an abundance of vesicles 0.1 
- I ~m in diameter which make up th is  vesicular band. 
They undoubtedly contain the enzymes for  protober- 
berine synthesis. As has been observed previously for  
Berberis (Amann et a l . ,  1986), the Coptis vesicles 
are also yellow in color and chromatographic analysis 
shows that they contain berberine, coptisine, palma- 
t ine,  and ja t ror rh iz ine  in the same rat io  as found in 
vacuoles (data not shown). This indicates that the 
vesicles are the or ig in of synthesis of protober- 
berines and are also involved in the transport of 
these quaternary alkaloids. 
DISCUSSION 
The pathway to berberine had been previously 
completely worked out at the enzyme level using main- 
ly Berberis cel l  cultures (Zenk et a l . ,  1985). The 
main feature of the Berberis pathway is the 5-step 
formation of (S) - ret icu l ine from dopamine and 4- 
hydroxyphenylacetaldehyde and the subsequent entrance 
of th is  central intermediate into a smooth vesicle. 
(S)-Reticul ine, having entered th is  compartment, is 
immediately transformed to (S)-scoulerine which is 
subsequently methylated at the 9-O-position to y ie ld  
(S)-tetrahydrocolumbamine. This intermediate in Ber- 
beris is f i r s t  oxidized by STOX to columbamine and 
subsequently in a f ina l  step the methylenedioxy group 
is formed at the level of the quaternary protober- 
berine to result  in berberine. This route, as can be 
judged from the cata lyt ic  properties of the STOX 
enzyme, is realized in the plant famil ies Berberida- 
ceae, Papaveraceae ,  and Men ispermaceae.  I t  seems to 
be therefore the main pathway in the plant kingdom. 
In th is  paper, however, we present an alternat ive 
route to berberine which corresponds to a previously 
postulated but experimentally, at the enzyme level, 
not proven pathway (Barton et a l . ,  1965). Yamada and 
Okada (1985) have made the important observation that 
in crude extracts of C. japonica an oxidase is found 
which is in i ts  properties d i f ferent  from the 
previously described STOX enzyme (Amann et a l . ,  
1984): the Coptis enzyme dehydrogenates exclusively 
(S)-canadine and in contrast to the Berberis oxidase 
does not y ie ld  hydrogen peroxide but water. Indeed, 
we confirm in th is  paper that the Coptis oxidase is 
d i f ferent  from the Berberis oxidase. However, the 
or ig inal  observations on the Coptis oxidase have to 
be modified. F i rst ,  in the crude Coptis extract there 
are several oxidases acting on tetrahydroprotober- 
berines. The main oxidase described in th is  paper was 
shown to dehydrogenate mainly (S)-canadine, but in 
contrast to previous assumption, also acted on other 
(S)-tetrahydroprotoberberines such as stylopine and 
tetrahydrocolumbamine. The main difference between 
the Coptis and the Berberis oxidase is, however, that 
Fig. 2 Electron micrographs of ultra thin sections of the particulate fraction after sucrose density 
gradient centrifugation. This fraction is predominantly composed of vesicles with a diameter anging 
from 0.1 to 1.0 lam. A. Coptis; B. Berberis. 
the lat ter  oxidizes with high ef f ic iency norret i -  
culine and scoulerine. Both enzymes produce as one of 
the reaction products hydrogen peroxide. This fact 
was missed by Yamada and Okada (1985), since these 
authors used crude enzyme extracts from Coptis 
probably containing catalase, which degraded the 
reaction product. Both enzyme systems are housed in 
smooth vesicles which are the s i te of synthesis of 
protoberberines and also seem to be the carr iers to 
transport these quaternary alkaloids to the vacuoles, 
the f ina l  storage compartment. In spite of th is  and 
the physical s imi la r i t ies  of both enzymes as shown in 
Fig. 2, the f ina l  steps of berberine biosynthesis in 
the Berberis and the Coptis system are Fundamentally 
d i f ferent  as shown in Fig. 3. 
The fact that there are two alternat ive pathways for  
one and the same secondary plant product should serve 
as a warning to us not to generalize pathways even i f  
th is  metabolic route is completely established at the 
enzyme level for  one species. This fact w i l l  increase 
the number of biotechnological ly interest ing enzymes 
involved in secondary metabolism in plants, over the 
enormous number already expected by assuming that 
each product is formed only by one and the same 
pathway. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT - This work was supported by Sonder- 
forschungsbereich 145 of Deutsche Forschungsgemein- 
schaft, Bonn, and Fonds der Chemischen Industr ie.  We 
thank Dr. T. M. Kutchan for  her l ingu is t i c  help in 
the preparation of th is  manuscript and Miss S. Kunz 
for excel lent technical assistance. 
REFERENCES 
Amann M, Nagakura N, lenk MH (1984) Tetrahedron 
Lett. 25:g53-954 
Amann M, Wanner G, Zenk MH (1986) Planta 167: 
310-320 
Amann M, Nagakura N, Zenk MH (1987) Phytochem., 
in press 
Barton DHR, Hesse RH, Kirby GW (1965) J. Chem. 
Soc. 6379 
Bradford MM (1976) Anal. Biochem. 72:248]254 
Fuj ita Y, Tabata M (1987) In: Green CE, Somers DA, 
llackett WP, Biesboer DD (eds) Plant tissue and 
ceIi  culture. Alan R Liss Inc, New York, 169-186 
Fukui H, Nakagawa K, Tsuda S, Tabata M (1982) In: 
Fujiwara A (ed) Plant Tissue Culture 1982, 
Maruzen, Tokyo, pp 313-314 
Linsma/er EM, Skoog F (1965) Physiol. Plant. 18: 
100-127 
Loeff ler S, Stadler R, Nagakura N, Zenk MH (1987) 
J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun.: 1160-1162 
Rueffer M, Zenk MH (1985) Tetrahedron Lett. 26: 
201-202 
Stadler R, Kutchan TM, Loeff ler S, Nagakura N, 
Cassels B, Zenk MH (1987) Tetrahedron Lett. 28: 
1251-1252 
Yamada Y, Okada N (1985) Phytochem. 24:63-65 
Yamamoto H, Nakagawa K, Fukui H, Tabata M (1986) 
Plant Cell Reports 5:65-68 
Zenk MH, Rueffer M, Amann M, Deus-Neumann B, 
Nagakura N (1985) J. Nat. Products 48:725-738 
(SI-NORRETICULINE 
[BERBERiS I 
H3CO~N 
HO~ ~/H~'~'~C"~-/"OCH~ 
(S) -TE TRAHYDROCOLUMBAMINE 
(S}-RETICULINE {S)-SCOULERINE 
H 3 C O ~  
~ 1-13 
COLUMBAMINE 
(S)-CANADINE 
.._z_. 
tr- v ~oc l -h  
~OCH3 
BERBERINE 
Fig. 3 Biosynthetic sequence leading 
from (S)-reticuline to berberine 
catalysed by two common enzymes: 
1. berberine bridge enzyme, 2. (S)- 
scoulerine-9-0- methylt ransferas% and 
two enzymes specific for the Berberis 
pathway" 3. (S)-tetrahydroprotober- 
berine oxidase and 4. berberine synthase. 
The alternative Coptis pathway is 
characterized by 5. (S)-canadine 
synthase and 6. (S)-canadine oxidase. 
