Plant Physiol. (1 997) 11 3: 1343-1 349 
In Vivo Studies of the Biosynthesis of a-Eleostearic 
Acid in the Seed of Momordica charanfia L.' 
Linsen Liu, Earl C. Hammond*, and Basil J. Nikolau 
Department of Food Science and Human Nutrition (L.L.,E.G.H., B.J.N.) and Department of Biochemistry and 
Biophysics (E.G.H., B.J.N.), lowa State University, Ames, lowa 5001 1 
In vivo radiotracer experiments using 14C-labeled acetate, oleate, 
linoleate, and linolenate were conducted to investigate the biosyn- 
thesis of a-eleostearic acid in the seeds of Momordica charantia. 
With the exception of ['4C]linolenate, all of these precursors radio- 
actively labeled a-eleostearate. Kinetics of the time course of me- 
tabolism of the radioactive precursors indicate that linoleate is the 
acyl precursor of a-eleostearate and that its conversion to 
a-eleostearate occurs while the acyl moiety is esterified to PC. 
Pulse-chase experiments with 14C-labeled acetate or linoleate pro- 
vided additional corroborative evidence that linoleoyl PC is the 
precursor of a-eleostearoyl PC. 
The most common trienoic fatty acid that occurs in plants 
is a-linolenic acid (cis-9,cis-12,cis-15-octadecatrienoic acid). 
This is the most prevalent fatty acid of the photosynthetic 
membranes of chloroplasts and occurs at various levels in 
the seed oils of many plants. Severa1 conjugated isomers of 
a-linolenic acid occur in a limited number of plant families 
and sometimes become a major constituent of the seed oil. 
One of these, aESA (cis-9,trans-ll,trans-13-octadecatrienoic 
acid) constitutes 77 to 86% of the fatty acids of the seed oil of 
Aleurites fordii, which is the source of tung oil that is widely 
used in drying oils (Hammond, 1991). Other examples of 
conjugated trienes include catalpic acid (trans-9, trans-l1,cis- 
13-octadecatrienoic acid) of Catalpa ovata, punicic acid 
(cis-9,trans-ll,cis-13-octadecatrienoic acid) of Punica grana- 
tum, jacaric acid (cis-8,trans-l0,cis-12-octadecatrienoic acid) 
of Jacaranda mimosijolia, and calendic acid (trans-8,tran.ç- 
10,cis-l2-octadecatrienoic acid) from Calendula officinalis. In 
addition, a related set of oxygenated, conjugated trienes 
occurs in seeds of some plants; an example is licanic acid 
(4-keto-cis-9,trans-ll,trans-l3-octadecatrienoic acid) in sev- 
era1 species of Licania and Parinarium (Markley, 1960). 
A number of chemical mechanisms have been proposed 
to describe the biological origins of conjugated trienoic 
acids. These include the stereospecific isomerization of 
a-linolenic acid, the formation of a radical of linoleic acid 
due to a lipoxygenase-type reaction (Morris and Marshall, 
1966; Crombie and Holloway, 1984, 1985; Noda, 1984), or 
the formation of an epoxy derivative of linoleic acid (Gun- 
stone, 1965). To obtain additional information on the bio- 
genesis of conjugated trienoic acids, we undertook in vivo 
radiotracer studies of the biosynthesis of aESA in the de- 
veloping seeds of the bitter gourd Momordica charantia. This 
species is particularly amenable for such studies because its 
seeds contain large quantities of aESA (Verma and Aggar- 
wal, 1956; Chisholm and Hopkins, 1964; Conacher et al., 
1970; Hopkins, 1990), and it is easy to grow in a green- 
house, making developing seeds readily available for bio- 
chemical studies. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
Momordica charantia was grown from seed in a green- 
house under 14 h of artificially supplemented illumination 
at a temperature ranging between 22 and 25°C. Under 
these conditions plants flowered 4 weeks after planting and 
were pollinated manually; the fruits matured 30 to 35 DAP. 
Seeds were dissected from the fruit, the seed coat was 
removed, and the developing seeds were kept on ice in 0.1 
M phosphate buffer (pH 6.65) until use. 
Sodium [l-14C]acetate (55 Cilmol) solution was pur- 
chased from ICN. [l-14C]Oleic and [ l-'4C]linoleic acids (50 
Cilmol) were purchased in toluene from Amersham. The 
ammonium salts of the fatty acid were prepared by evap- 
orating the toluene from 0.5 mL of radioactive fatty acid 
solution and heating the residue with 0.2 mL of 2 M 
NH40H at 60°C for 10 min. Nitrogen was bubbled through 
the resulting solution to remove residual ammonia. Chem- 
icals and biochemicals were obtained from Sigma and 
Fisher Scientific. 
In Vivo Radioisotopic Labeling 
Thirty-six developing seeds (approximately 6 g) were 
placed in a 2-mL solution of 0.1 M phosphate buffer, pH 
6.65, containing 10 pCi of sodium [l-14C]acetate, ammo- 
nium [l-'4C]oleate, or ammonium [l-'4C]linoleate and in- 
shaking at 100 rpm. At various times after the start of the 
This work was supported in part by grants from the 'Owa cubated at roam temperafure (approximately 25°C) while Soybean Promotion Board and The Herman Frasch Foundation 
(grant no. 322-HF92 to B.J.N.). This is journal paper no. J-17140 of 
the Iowa Agriculture and Home Economics Experiment Station 
(Ames, IA), projects no. 3080 and 2913, and supported by the 
Hatch Act and State of Iowa funds. 
* Corresponding author; e-mail hammond9iastate.edu; fax 
1-515-294 - 8181. 
Abbreviations: aESA, a-eleostearic acid; aESate, a-eleostearate; 
aESoyl, a-eleostearoyl; DAG, diacylglycerol; DAP, days after pol- 
lination; PC, phosphatidylcholine; PE, phosphatidylethanolamine; 
PI, phosphatidylinositol; TAG, triacylglycerol. 
1343 
 www.plantphysiol.orgon May 13, 2019 - Published by Downloaded from 
Copyright © 1997 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.
1344 Liu et al. Plant Physiol. Vol. 11 3, 1997 
incubation, six seeds were removed and placed in a 2-g 
vial, washed three times with 1 mL of ice-cold water, and 
placed in 1 mL of water. After heating for 15 min in a 
boiling-water bath to inactivate phospholipases, the seeds 
were stored at -30°C until the lipid was extracted. 
For pulse-chase experiments, 50 seeds (approximately 
8 g) were incubated as described in the presence of 20 pCi 
of sodium [l-14C]acetate, ammonium [l-14C]oleate, or am- 
monium [l-14C]linoleate for 1 h. After this pulse of label, 
the buffer containing the radioisotope was removed and six 
seeds (approximately 1 g/sample) were washed and 
heated in water as described. The remaining seeds were 
washed three times with 5 mL of phosphate buffer contain- 
ing nonradioactive 10 mM sodium acetate, ammonium 
oleate, or ammonium linoleate. The seeds were finally in- 
cubated as before in fresh buffer in the absence of the 
radioisotope. At various times after the start of the chase 
incubation, six seeds (approximately 1 g /  sample) were 
removed, processed, and stored as described. 
A11 in vivo radioactive labeling experiments were con- 
ducted three times, and very similar results were obtained 
each time. In each type of experiment the data from one 
typical experiment are presented. 
Lipid Extractions 
The seeds were homogenized with 1 mL of methanol in 
a 7-mL Broeck tissue grinder (Fisher Scientific). The ho- 
mogenate was centrifuged, the supernatant was removed, 
and the residual solids were extracted twice with 2 mL of 
ch1oroform:methanol (2:1, v /v)  and once with 2 mL of 
chloroform (Christie, 1982). The extracts were pooled with 
0.9 mL of water, and the chloroform layer containing the 
lipid was recovered and concentrated by evaporation un- 
der reduced pressure at ambient temperature. The recov- 
ered lipid was dissolved in 1 mL of ch1oroform:methanol 
(2:1, v /v)  and stored under nitrogen at -30°C. 
Lipid Separations and Analyses 
Lipid classes were fractionated by TLC on silica gel H 
plates (200 X 200 X 0.5 mm) impregnated with 0.8 mM 
sodium carbonate (Skipski et al., 1964). Polar lipids were 
fractionated with the solvent ch1oroform:methanol:acetic 
acid:water (25:15:8:4, v/v). Neutra1 lipids were fractionated 
with the solvent hexane:ethyl ether:acetic acid (60:40:1, 
v/v). These fractionations were undertaken either on sep- 
arate plates or by double development. In the latter, the 
polar lipids were first fractionated by developing the plate 
halfway to the top; the solvent was then evaporated under 
a stream of CO, gas, and the neutral lipids, which were in 
the solvent front, were separated by developing the plate 
a11 the way to the top with the second solvent. After chro- 
matography, the developing solvents were removed under 
a stream of CO, gas, and the neutral lipid bands were 
located by spraying the vertical edges of the plates with 
0.1% (w / v) 2',7'-dichlorofluorescein in methanol; simi- 
larly, the polar lipids were detected with 0.01% (w/v) 
aqueous Rhodamine 6G (Sigma). 
For fatty acid analysis, the silica gel containing each lipid 
was scraped from the TLC plates, and the fatty acids were 
directly converted to methyl esters without remova1 of the 
lipids from the silica gel (Christie, 1982). For the polar 
lipids, to avoid the water in the Rhodamine 6G spray 
solution, only the portion of the bands in the unsprayed 
areas of the plates was taken for derivatization. Methyl 
esters were prepared by mixing the collected lipid- 
containing silica with 0.5 mL of 1 M sodium methoxide and 
incubating the mixture with shaking at 30 to 40°C for 1 h. 
The reactions were terminated by adding 1 mL of water, 
and the fatty acyl esters were recovered by extraction with 
hexane. The hexane was evaporated under a stream of CO, 
gas, and the residue was dissolved in 0.1 to 0.3 mL of 
methanol. The fatty acyl esters were analyzed immediately 
after derivatization by HPLC on a Beckman System Gold 
instrument fitted with a 4 mm X 25 cm Supelco (State 
College, PA) C-18 column using acetonitrile or 5% water in 
methanol as the solvent. The elution of fatty acyl methyl 
esters was detected by A,,, monitored with an on-line UV 
detector (modell66, Beckman). Radioactivity was detected 
with an on-line radioactivity detector (model 171, Beck- 
man) equipped with a 1-mL cell using Ready Flow I11 
(Beckman) as the on-line scintillation cocktail. The methyl 
ester peaks were identified by comparing their retention 
volumes with those of standards. 
Because of the extreme susceptibility of lipids containing 
aESA to oxidation, the TLC fractionation of lipids and 
subsequent fatty acid analyses were undertaken without 
delay and with minimal exposure of the samples to air. 
The fatty acid composition of lipids from developing and 
mature seeds was analyzed as methyl esters by GC (model 
5890, Hewlett-Packard) fitted with a flame-ionization de- 
tector and a 15 m X 0.244 mm DB-23 capillary column 
(J&W, Deerfield, IL) operated at 200°C with a helium flow 
of 1 mL/min. Peaks were identified by comparing reten- 
tion times with those of standards. 
, 
Determination of Radioactivity 
Aliquots of lipid samples were mixed with 4 mL of 
ScintinVerse BD (Fisher Scientific) in 4-mL polypropylene 
vials, and radioactivity was determined on a scintillation 
analyzer (model 2200CA, Packard Instruments, Downers 
Grove, IL). Lipid bands on TLC plates were revealed with 
iodine vapor, the lipid-containing silica was scraped into 
vials, and radioactivity was determined as described. 
RESULTS 
Lipid Accumulation during Seed Development 
In the greenhouse conditions used in these experiments, 
M. charantia fruit matured at 30 to 35 DAP. During this 
period, seeds grew from small, flat ellipsoids (5  mm X 2 
mm X 0.5 mm) at 14 DAP to full size (15 mm X 7 mm X 2 
mm) by 28 DAP, and the seeds subsequently desiccated. 
Also during this period, the fresh weight of the seeds 
increased from 60 to 182 mg/seed. Table I illustrates that 
lipids constitute nearly one-third of the dry weight of the 
mature seed (33 DAP) and that lipid accumulation was 
about 80% completed by 18 DAP. Thus, in the experiments 
 www.plantphysiol.orgon May 13, 2019 - Published by Downloaded from 
Copyright © 1997 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.
B iosy n thesis of a- Eleostearic Acid 
80 - 
60 - 
1345 
Table 1. Growth and lipid accumulation of developing M. charan- 
tia seeds 
Seed Weight 
D ry Fresh 
DAP Lipid Content 
mg % 
14 5.9 60.0 15 
18  15.8 165.2 26 
28 74.8 181.6 31 
33 86.0 161 .O 33 
described below, seeds between 14 and 18 DAP were 
used because this was the period when lipid rapidly 
accumulated. 
The fatty acid composition of the lipids isolated from 
mature seeds of M. charantia is very similar to the fatty acid 
composition of the lipids of seeds at 16 DAP. In seeds 
harvested 16 DAP, aESate accounts for nearly two-thirds of 
the fatty acids, and stearic acid is the other major fatty acid 
(Table 11). aESate occurs mainly in the neutral lipids TAG 
and DAG, in which it accounts for 62.2 and 29.6% of the 
fatty acids, respectively. The only other lipid in which 
aESate was detected was PC, but only in small quantities 
(1.7%). The other major fatty acid in TAG and DAG was 
stearate. 
The three phospholipids found in M. charantia seeds, PE, 
PI, and PC, have fatty acid compositions distinct from the 
neutral lipids. Linoleate is the most abundant fatty acid in 
the phospholipids, constituting about one-half to two- 
thirds of the fatty acids in these lipids. The PC fraction is 
slightly more unsaturated than the fractions of PI and PE, 
with a larger linoleate and smaller stearate content in the 
former lipid. The fatty acid composition of DAG is inter- 
mediate between the fatty acid composition of TAG and 
phospholipids. 
In Vivo Labeling of Seed Lipids with [1-l4C]Acetate 
As shown in Figure lA, [l-14C]acetate was rapidly incor- 
porated into lipids in the 1st h of incubation, whereas in the 
subsequent 7 h of incubation, the rate of incorporation 
decreased 20-fold. PC was the most heavily labeled lipid in 
the initial time points of the incubation. Indeed, at the first 
time point (15 min), radioactivity in PC accounted for 
nearly 80% of the label incorporated into lipids. Subse- 
1 0 0  
60 
B 
20 
9 
- n  a .- 
'CI 
8 
8 0  2ok=e=z- 
a" 100{-\ D 
O 
O 2 4 6 8 
Labeling time (h) 
Figure 1. lncorporation of radioactivity from [l  -14C]acetate into lipids 
and fatty acids of developing M. charantia seeds. Developing seeds 
were incubated in the presence of [l-l4C1acetate. A, At the indicated 
times, the amount of radioactivity incorporated into total lipids (X), PC 
(A), DAC (A), and TAC ( O )  was determined. The proportion of 
radioactivity in the stearoyl (O), oleoyl (O), linoleoyl (O), and aESoyl 
(m) moieties of PC (B), DAC (C), and TAC (D) was determined. 
quently, the proportion of radioactivity in PC declined 
steadily, to 26% by 8 h. As radioactivity in PC declined, the 
proportion of label in DAG and TAG increased, but DAG 
Table I I .  Fatty acid composition of lipids of developing M. charantia seeds 
Developing seeds were collected 16 DAP. 
Fattv Acid 
Lipid 
Palmitic Stearic Oleic Linoleic aESA 
wt% 
Total 2.2 25.3 6.6 6.2 59.8 
TAG 1.5 31.8 2.3 2.2 62.2 
DAG 7.7 31.4 7.7 27.6 29.6 
PC 11.4 5.0 13.3 68.6 1.7 
PE 17.3 14.3 13.0 55.4 n.d." 
PI 12.1 26.1 10.8 50.9 n.d." 
a n.d., Not detectable. 
 www.plantphysiol.orgon May 13, 2019 - Published by Downloaded from 
Copyright © 1997 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.
1346 Liu et al. 
was always more heavily labeled than the TAG (ratio of 
radioactive DAG:TAG ranged between 1.5 and 2.5). The 
only other lipids that incorporated radioactivity to any 
significant extent were PE and PI, which accounted for 3 to 
6% of the radioactivity each (data not shown). 
The distribution of radioactivity in each acyl group of the 
various lipid classes was determined by transesterification 
of each isolated lipid to form the methyl acyl esters, which 
were analyzed by radio HPLC. The distribution of the 
radioactivity among the fatty acids of PE and PI are not 
shown because these lipids contained a small proportion of 
the radioisotope, and no aESate was detected in these 
lipids. 
The oleoyl moiety on PC was the most heavily labeled 
fatty acid in the initial stages of the incubation. With in- 
creasing time of incubation, radioactivity in the oleoyl moi- 
ety of PC declined, and it was incorporated first into the 
linoleoyl and then into the aESoyl moieties of PC. Indeed, 
aESate first became radioactively labeled on PC. At longer 
incubation times (1 h and longer), as label in PC declined, 
increasing label was recovered sequentially in DAG and 
TAG, and the proportion of labeled linoleate and aESate in 
these lipids increased. At the initial time points of the 
incubation, stearate was the most heavily labeled fatty ester 
in the neutra1 lipids TAG and DAG. On longer incubation, 
however, the proportion of radioactivity in other fatty ac- 
ids increased. In DAG, oleate and linoleate became radio- 
actively labeled before the incorporation of label in aESate. 
In TAG aESate became labeled before oleate and linoleate. 
In Vivo Pulse-Chase Labeling of Seed 
Lipids with 11 -l4C1Acetate 
To further investigate the biosynthesis of aESA, dehu- 
lled, developing M .  charantia seeds were exposed to 
[1-l4C]acetate, and after 1 h, the radioactive acetate was 
replaced with nonradioactive acetate, and the incubation 
was continued for an additional 8 h. Figure 2A shows the 
total incorporation of radioactivity into the lipids of the 
seeds at various times after the label was removed. The 
total amount of label recovered in lipids was relatively 
stable during the chase phase of the experiment. PC was 
the most heavily labeled lipid at the end of the pulse phase 
of the experiment and subsequently declined steadily dur- 
ing the chase phase of the experiment. The radioactive label 
disappearing from PC was recovered in DAG and TAG, 
with the former always containing a greater proportion of 
the radioactivity. PE and PI contained a constant, low leve1 
of radioactivity throughout the chase phase of the experi- 
ment (data not shown), and these lipids were not charac- 
terized further. 
Figure 2, B, C, D illustrates the distribution of radioac- 
tivity in oleate, linoleate, and aESate, respectively, associ- 
ated with PC, DAG, and TAG during the chase phase of the 
experiment. In addition to these three fatty acyl moieties, 
the only other acyl group that was heavily labeled was 
stearate, which accounted for a large proportion of the 
radioactivity associated with DAG and TAG (70 and 50%, 
respectively); the stearoyl moiety of PC accounted for 
Plant Physiol. Vol. 11 3, 1997 
6 
5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
O 
2 
1 
O 
O 2 4  6 8 
Chase period (h) 
Figure 2. Pulse-chase analysis of the incorporation of radioactivity 
from [l-'4C]acetate into lipids and fatty acids of developing M. 
charantia seeds. Developing seeds were incubated in the presence of 
[l-'4C]acetate for 1 h, after which seeds were incubated for the 
indicated times in the presence of nonradioactive acetate. A, The 
amount of radioactivity incorporated into total lipids (O), PC (A), 
DAC (O), and TAC (W) was determined. The amount of radioactivity 
in the oleoyl (B), linoleoyl (C), and olESoyl (D) moieties of PC (A), 
DAG (O), and TAG (4) was determined. 
<20% of the radioactivity associated with this lipid (data 
not shown). 
As expected from the experiment described in Figure 1, at 
the end of the pulse phase of the experiment, oleate esteri- 
fied to PC was the most radioactive acyl moiety (Fig. 2B). 
During the chase, radioactivity in the oleoyl moiety of PC 
declined (Fig. 2B). This decline occurred because oleate was 
moved to other lipids as radioactivity associated with the 
oleoyl moieties of DAG and TAG remained constant (Fig. 
28). The decline in radioactivity of the oleoyl moiety of PC 
was due to its conversion to linoleate and aESate. Thus, 
radioactivity in the linoleoyl (Fig. 2C) and aESoyl (Fig. 2D) 
moieties of PC transiently increased and subsequently also 
declined. The increase in the incorporation of radioactivity 
 www.plantphysiol.orgon May 13, 2019 - Published by Downloaded from 
Copyright © 1997 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.
Biosynthesis of a-Eleostearic Acid 
1 .- 100- 
(CI jj 40- 
a I
.& 80- 
f 60- 
O 20- 
1347 
0-A; \( 
0 - 4  : 
in the linoleoyl moiety of PC reached a plateau within 15 
min of the start of the chase (Fig. 2C), whereas the radioac- 
tivity in aESate did not peak until 2 h into the chase 
(Fig. 2D), when radioactivity in the linoleoyl moiety was 
decreasing. 
In Vivo Labeling of Seed Lipids with [l -'4C]Oleate, 
[I -'4ClLinoleate, and 11 -'4ClLinolenate 
To obtain additional insights into how aESA is synthe- 
sized, developing M. charantia seeds were incubated with 
ammonium salts of [l-14C]oleate (Fig. 3), [l-'4C]linoleate 
(Fig. 4), or [l-14C]linolenate (data not shown), and the 
incorporation of radioactivity into the lipids of the seeds 
was monitored. Although a11 three fatty acids were taken 
up and incorporated into the lipids of M. charantia seeds, 
16 L.EI 
% x  12 
O 
100 
80 
60 
40 
3 20 
s 
1 0  
.B 100 
P 
1 60 
w 40 
5 20 
E! 
k o  
:z 80 
.- 
100 
80 
60 
40 
20 
O 
A 
B 
i i i i  
Labeling time (h) 
Figure 3. lncorporation of radioactivity from 11 -'4Cloleate into lipids 
and fatty acids of developing M. charantia seeds. Developing seeds 
were incubated in the presence of [l-'4C]oleate. A, At the indicated 
times, the amount of radioactivity incorporated into total lipids (X), 
PC (A), DAG (A), and TAG ( O )  was determined. The proportion of 
radioactivity in the oleoyl (O), linoleoyl (O), and aESoyl (U) moieties 
of PC (B), DAG (C), and TAG (D) was determined. 
:i 3 /- 
O 1 2 3 4  
Chase pericd (h) 
Figure 4. lncorporation of radioactivity from [ l  - '4Cll in~leate into 
lipids and fatty acids of developing M. charantia seeds. Developing 
seeds were incubated in the presence of Il-'4Cllinoleate. A, At the 
indicated times, the amount of radioactivity incorporated into total 
lipids (X), PC (A), DAG (A), and TAG ( O )  was determined. The 
proportion of radioactivity in the linoleoyl (O) and aESoyl (U) moi- 
eties of PC (B), DAG (C), and TAG (D) was determined. 
[l-l4Cjlinolenate was not converted to aESate, whereas 
both [l-14C]oleate (Fig. 3) and [l-14C]linoleate (Fig. 4) were 
converted to aESate. Thus, experiments with these latter 
two precursors were fully analyzed. 
In both of these experiments, PC was the most heavily 
radioactively labeled lipid, followed by the neutra1 lipids 
DAG and TAG (Figs. 3 and 4), whereas PE and PI were 
labeled at negligible levels (data not shown). At the start of 
the incubation of seeds with [l-14C]oleate, this fatty acid 
was the most prominent radioactively labeled moiety of 
PC, DAG, and TAG (Fig. 3). As the incubation proceeded, 
the proportion of radioactivity in the oleoyl moieties of 
these lipids decreased concomitant with an increase in the 
linoleoyl and aESoyl moieties. This change in fatty acid 
labeling pattern first occurred on PC (Fig. 3B), followed by 
DAG (Fig. 3C), and finally in TAG (Fig. 3D). Furthermore, 
on TAG, no radioactively labeled linoleate was detected, 
 www.plantphysiol.orgon May 13, 2019 - Published by Downloaded from 
Copyright © 1997 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.
1348 Liu et al. Plant Physiol. Vol. 11 3, 1997 
but aESate accounted for nearly 20% of the label on this 
lipid by the end of the incubation. 
Fifteen minutes after [l-14C]linoleate was provided to 
developing seeds, the only radioactively labeled fatty acid 
detected on PC (Fig. 4B), DAG (Fig. 4C), and TAG (Fig. 4D) 
was linoleate. As the incubation proceeded radioactively 
labeled aESate was detected in a11 three of these lipids as 
the proportion of radioactivity in the linoleoyl moiety of 
each lipid decreased. Indeed, apart from [l-14C]linoleate, 
the only radioactively labeled fatty acid to be detected in 
this experiment was aESate. This apparent exchange in 
radioactive label between these two fatty acids was fastest 
in PC, so that 2 h into the incubation nearly 15% of the 
radioactivity in PC was associated with aESate, whereas 
only 6 and 12% of the radioactivity was associated with this 
fatty acid on DAG and TAG, respectively. 
Finally, pulse-chase experiments similar to those de- 
scribed with [l-’4C]acetate were undertaken with 
[ l-14C]linoleate as the radioactive precursor. At the end of 
the pulse phase of these experiments, the most heavily 
labeied li$d was PC, followed in descending 
O 
1 . 5 1  /------ 
o.,! 
0.5 
irder by 
o. 1 
~~~ O 
O 2 4 6 8 
Incubation time (h) 
Figure 5. Pulse-chase analysis of the incorporation of radioactivity 
from [l-’4C]linoleate into lipids and fatty acids of developing M. 
charantia seeds. Developing seeds were incubated in the presence of 
[l-’4C]linoleate for 1 h, after which seeds were incubated for the 
indicated times in the presence of nonradioactive linoleate. A, At the 
indicated times, the amount  of radioactivity incorporated into total 
lipids ([circf), PC (A), DAG (O), and TAG (W) was determined. The 
amount of radioactivity in the linoleoyl (B), and aESoyl (C) moieties 
of PC (A), DAG (o), and TAC (B) was determined. 
DAG and TAG (Fig. 5A). During the chase, the radioactiv- 
ity in PC and DAG declined with a concomitant increase in 
the radioactivity associated with TAG (Fig. 5A). During the 
switch of radioactivity from PC and DAG to TAG, with the 
exception of the aESoyl moiety of PC, radioactivity asso- 
ciated with a11 of the acyl groups esterified to PC and DAG 
declined, whereas radioactivity in the acyl groups of TAG 
increased. Most significantly, the radioactivity associated 
with the aESoyl moiety of PC initially increased before its 
decline (Fig. 5B). The timing of this transient association of 
radioactivity with the aESoyl moiety of PC is intermediate 
between the decrease in the radioactivity of the linoleoyl 
moiety of PC and the increase in the radioactivity of the 
aESoyl moiety of TAG (compare Fig. 5, B and C). 
D I SC USSl ON 
Seeds of M. ckarantia accumulate large quantities of the 
conjugated trienoic fatty acid aESA, most of which is es- 
terified to TAG. Developing M. ckarantia seeds proved 
highly amenable to radiotracer studies designed to eluci- 
date the biosynthesis of this unusual fatty acid. Namely, 
seeds excised from fruit at about 16 DAP readily took up 
exogenously provided [l-14C]acetate, [l-14C]oleate, 
[l-14C]linoleate, and [l-14C]linolenate and incorporated 
them into lipids. With the exception of the last, a11 these 
precursors efficiently radioactively labeled aESate. 
We have interpreted these radiotracer experiments to 
indicate that aESA is synthesized from linoleate and that 
this conversion occurs while these acyl moieties are ester- 
ified to the phospholipid PC. The evidence supporting this 
statement is outlined in the following discussion. First, in 
the radioisotopic labeling experiments, although PC con- 
tained low concentrations of aESate, this acyl moiety of PC 
was very efficiently labeled. Thus, when [l4C]acetate was 
the radioactive precursor, aESA esterified to PC attained 
specific radioactivities in the range of 1 x 107 dpm/g to 5 X 
107 dpm/g, whereas aESA esterified to TAG attained a 
specific radioactivity of at least 1000-fold less. Further- 
more, radioactivity derived from [14C]oleate and [14C]li- 
noleate also labeled- the aESoyl acyl moiety of PC to a 
specific radioactivity 1000-fold greater than the aESoyl 
moiety of TAG. These results indicate that although aESate 
does not accumulate on PC, it quickly and transiently 
moves through this lipid. 
In the experiments in which the 14C-labeled precursor was 
continuously supplied to the developing seeds, aESate first 
became radioactively labeled on PC and, subsequently, on 
DAG and TAG. Thus, from [14C]acetate, the aESoyl moiety 
of PC first became labeled 30 min into the incubation, 
whereas the aESoyl moiety of TAG required 2 h before 
becoming radioactively labeled. With [14C]oleate as the pre- 
cursor, the corresponding times required for first labeling 
the aESoyl moiety of PC and TAG were 2 and 4 h, respec- 
tively. When [14C]linoleate was used as the precursor, the 
labeling of aESate was coincidental on a11 three lipids, PC, 
DAG, and TAG, being detected 30 min into the incubation, 
but the initial labeling of the aESoyl moiety of PC was faster 
and more extensive than the labeling of the aESoyl moiety of 
 www.plantphysiol.orgon May 13, 2019 - Published by Downloaded from 
Copyright © 1997 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.
Biosynthesis of a-Eleostearic Acid 1349 
DAG and TAG. These data indicate that aESate is first 
synthesized on PC and that it is quickly mobilized from this 
phospholipid and incorporated sequentially into the neutral 
lipids DAG and TAG, where it accumulates. 
Additional evidence supporting this conclusion was ob- 
tained in pulse-chase experiments. A pulse of either 
[14C]acetate or [14C]linoleate was chased with nonradioac- 
tive acetate or linoleate, respectively, and the incorporation 
of the label into lipids was monitored. Little additional 
radioisotope was incorporated into lipids during the chase, 
and the aESoyl acyl moiety of PC became transiently ra- 
dioactive. In the experiments in which the radioisotope 
was provided as [I4C]acetate, the timing of this transient 
labeling of the aESoyl PC moiety was consistent with the 
conversion of linoleoyl PC to aESate PC. Thus, the disap- 
pearance of radioactive oleoyl PC coincided with the se- 
quential labeling of linoleoyl PC and aESate PC. Subse- 
quently, the linoleoyl and aESoyl moieties of DAG and 
TAG became radioactive as radioactivity was lost from 
linoleoyl PC and aESoyl PC. 
The pulse-chase experiment with [14C]linoleate provided 
even more compelling evidence in support of the biosynthetic 
origins of aESA. During the chase phase of these experiments, 
as the amount of radioactivity in linoleoyl PC declined, and 
before the increase of radioactive aESate in DAG and TAG, 
we observed a transient accumulation of radioactivity in the 
aESoyl moiety of PC. The decline of radioactivity from 
aESoyl PC coincided with increased accumulation of radio- 
activity in aESoyl DAG and aESoyl TAG. 
Overall, the experiments described here indicate that 
aESA is synthesized while it is esterified to PC, and sub- 
sequently, this acyl moiety is incorporated into the neutral 
lipids. The involvement of PC in the biogenesis of aESate 
adds another biochemical function for this phospholipid in 
plants. Thus, in addition to the structural role of this phos- 
pholipid in membranes, PC has been shown to be inti- 
mately involved in the biogenesis of polyunsaturated fatty 
acids (linoleate and a-linolenate) (Heinz, 1993), the biogen- 
esis of the unusual fatty acids ricinoleate (Moreau and 
Stumpf, 1981; Bafor et al., 1991) and vernolate (Bafor et al., 
1993), and now it seems that PC is also involved in the 
biosynthesis of aESate. In seeds of most plants, the trienoic 
fatty acid synthesized is a-linolenate, which is the product 
of a A15-linoleoyl desaturase (Heinz, 1993). This enzyme 
acts upon a linoleoyl moiety esterified to PC. In developing 
M .  charantia seeds, A'5-linoleoyl desaturase seems to be 
inactive because a-linolenic acid was undetectable in the 
lipids extracted from M .  charantia seeds, and a-linolenic 
acid was never radioactively labeled in any of the experi- 
ments undertaken in this study. Instead, linoleoyl moieties 
of PC are acted upon by an enzyme system that can convert 
them to aESate. 
It is interesting that even though developing M .  charantia 
seeds do not synthesize a-linolenic acid, the lipid metabolic 
machinery of these seeds has the ability to incorporate 
this fatty acid into lipids; exogenously supplied 
[ 1-14C]linolenate was readily taken up and incorporated 
into the lipids of developing M .  charantia seeds, but this 
fatty acid was never converted to aESA. Because exog- 
enously supplied a-linolenic acid is not converted to CYESA, 
the biogenesis of the latter fatty acid is not via an isomer- 
ization reaction. Rather, as has been suggested for the 
synthesis of another conjugated trienoic fatty acid, calendic 
acid, in marigold seeds (Crombie and Holloway, 1984, 
1985), the synthesis of aESA seems to be from the direct 
conversion of linoleate. Although the exact chemical mech- 
anism of this conversion is unknown and cannot be deduced 
from the data presented here, our data indicate that this 
conversion probably occurs while the linoleate substrate is 
esterified to PC. In vitro experiments with extracts from M .  
charantia seeds are also consistent with this conclusion (L. 
Liu, E.G. Hammond, and B.J. Nikolau, unpublished data). 
Received November 4, 1996; accepted January 16, 1997. 
Copyright Clearance Center: 0032-0889/97/113 / 1343/08. 
LITERATURE ClTED 
Bafor M, Smith MA, Jonsson L, Stobart K, Stymne S (1991) 
Ricinoleic acid biosynthesis and triacylglycerol assembly in mi- 
crosomal preparations from developing castor-bean (Ricinus 
communis) endosperm. Biochem J 280 507-514 
Bafor M, Smith MA, Jonsson L, Stobart K, Stymne S (1993) 
Biosynthesis of vernoleate (cis-12-epoxyoctadeca-cis-9-enoate) in 
microsomal preparations from developing endosperm of Eu- 
phorbia lagascae. Arch Biochem Biophys 303: 145-151 
Chisholm MJ, Hopkins CY (1964) Fatty acid composition of some 
Cucurbitaceae seed oils. Can J Chem 4 2  560-564 
Christie WW (1982) Lipid Analysis, Ed 2. Pergamon Press, New York 
Conacher HBS, Gunstone FD, Hornby GM, Padley FB (1970) 
Glyceride studies. IX. Intraglyceride distribution of vernolic acid 
and of five conjugated octadecatrienoic acids. Lipids 5: 434-441 
Crombie L, Holloway SJ (1984) Origins of conjugated triene fatty 
acids: the biosynthesis of calendic acid by Calendula officinalis. J 
Chem SOC D Chem Commun 15: 953-955 
Crombie L, Holloway SJ (1985) The biosynthesis of calendic acid, 
octadeca-(SE,lOZ,lZZ)-trienoic acid by developing marigold 
seeds: origins of (E,E,Z)- and (Z,E,Z)-conjugated triene acids in 
higher plants. J Chem SOC Perkin Trans I 1985: 2425-2434 
Gunstone F D  (1965) A possible biosynthetic pathway to the con- 
jugated polyetenoid acids. Chem Ind 1965: 1033-1034 
Hammond EG (1991) The raw materials of the fats and oils indus- 
try. In P Wan, ed, Fats and Oils Processing. American Oil Chem- 
ists' Society, Champaign, IL, pp 1-15 
Heinz E (1993) Biosynthesis of polyunsaturated fatty acids. In TS 
Moore, ed, Lipid Metabolism in Plants. CRC Press, Ann Arbor, 
Hopkins CY (1990) Fatty acids of Cucurbitaceae seed oils in rela- 
tion to taxonomy. In DM Bates, RW Robinson, C Jeffrey, eds, 
Biology and Utilization of the Cucurbitaceae. Cornell University 
Press, Ithaca, NY, pp 38-50 
Markley KS (1960) Nomenclature, classification and description. In 
KS Markley, ed, Fatty Acids, Their Chemistry, Properties, Pro- 
duction and Uses. Interscience Publishers, New York, pp 23-249 
Moreau RA, Stumpf PK (1981) Recent studies of the enzymic 
synthesis of ricinoleic acid by developing castor beans. Plant 
Physiol 67: 672-676 
Morris LJ, Marshall MO (1966) Occurrence of cis-,trans-linoleic 
acid in seed oils. Chem Ind 1966 1493-1494 
Noda M (1984) Biosynthesis of conjugated polyenoic acids in plant 
seeds. In PA Siegenthaler, W Eichenberger, eds, Structure, Func- 
tion and Metabolism of Plant Lipids. Elsevier Sciences Publish- 
ers, New York, pp 29-32 
Skipski VP, Peterson RF, Barclay M (1964) Quantitative analysis 
of phospholipids by thin-layer chromatography. Biochem J 9 0  
Verma JP, Aggarwal JS (1956) A note on component fatty acids of 
the oil from the seed of Momordica charantia L. J Indian Chem SOC 
MI, pp 33-89 
362-378 
33: 357-358 
 www.plantphysiol.orgon May 13, 2019 - Published by Downloaded from 
Copyright © 1997 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.
