556 M. E. GREGORY AND E. S. HOLDSWORTH
Gregory, M. E. & Holdsworth, E. S. (1955b). Biochem. J.
59, 335.
Gregory, M. E. & Holdsworth, E. S. (1957). Biochem. J.
66, 456.
Gregory, M. E., Holdsworth, E. S. & Ottesen, M. (1957).
(7.R. Lab. Carlsberg, Sir. chim., 30, 147.
Heathcote, J. G. & Mooney, F. S. (1958). J. Pharm., Lond.,
10, 593.
Heinrich, H. C. & Erdmann-Oehlecker, S. (1956). Clin.
Chim. Acta, 1, 311.
Holdsworth, E. S. (1957). Biochem. J. 66, 59P.
Holdsworth, E. S. & Coates, M. E. (1956). Nature, Lond.,
177, 701.
Holdsworth, E. S. & Ottesen, M. (1955). Abstr. 3rd Int.
Congr. Biochem., Bru8sels, p. 116.
King, E. J. & Wootton, I. D. P. (1956). Micromethods in
Medical Biochemistry. London: J. and A. Churchill Ltd.
Miller, 0. N. (1957). Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 39,
301.
Ostrowski, W., Skariyfiski, B. & Zak, Z. (1954). Bull.
Acad. polon. Sci. 2, 9.
Pitney, W. R., Beard, M. F. & Van Loon, E. J. (1954).
J. biol. Chem. 207, 143.
Proom, H. (1943). J. Path. Bact. 55, 419.
Rosenthal, H. L. & Sarett, H. P. (1952). J. biol. Chem. 199,
433.
Skeggs, H. R., Nepple, H. M., Valentik, K. A., Huff, J. W.
& Wright, L. D. (1950). J. biol. Chem. 184, 211.
Wolff, R., Karlin, R. & Royer, P. (1952). C.R. Soc. Biol.,
Paris, 146, 1008.
The Alkaloids of Hemlock (Conium maculatum L.)
DISTRIBUTION IN RELATION TO THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE FRUIT
BY J. W. FAIRBAIRN AND S. B. CHALLEN
Department of Pharmaocoynoay, School of Pharmacy, Univer8ity of London
(Received 8 September 1958)
Much of the work published on the formation and
role ofthe alkaloids in the plant has been concemed
with the problem of the site of synthesis (whether
root or leaf) and the determination of possible pre-
cursors by suitable feeding experiments. We have
investigated the composition and quantity of the
alkaloids of a given plant during a critical stage in
its life history and have correlated our findings
with physiological age, anatomical changes and
histochemical tests. The phase of the development
of the flower to the mature fruit was selected for
study.
Conium maculatum L. (family Umbelliferae) was
chosen because (a) there was already evidence that
the quantity of alkaloid varied markedly as the
fruit developed, (b) the alkaloids present were
relatively simple ones and few in number and (c)
the alkaloids are said to be mainly restricted to a
special layer of the fruit (the coniine layer), which
would give scope for anatomical and histochemical
studies. Very few members of the Umbelliferae
produce alkaloids, the majority producing volatile
oils in clearly delimited tissues of the fruit, known
as vittae; in Conium, vittae occur in the young
fruits but almost disappear during maturation.
During the course of our work a paper on the
distribution of alkaloids in Conium mnaculatum was
published by Cromwell (1956). While Cromwell's
work anticipated some of our techniques, and we
have made use ofsome ofthose which he published,
it has not affected the main body of our work.
Some of our findings confirm those of Cromwell but
since we have made a more detailed study of a
restricted part of the life history of the plant, we
can make a more complete report of this aspect.
EXPERIMENTAL
Initially two separate samples of seeds were sown in the
School of Pharmacy Medicinal Plants Garden at Myddelton
House, Enfield, Middlesex; one sample was derived from
plants already growing at Myddelton House and the other
was obtained from Chelsea Physic Garden, London. It
soon became obvious that these two samples represented
two varieties of C. maculatum which differed slightly in
fruit and leaf morphology. More important still we found
that one variety (that from Chelsea) produced little or no
methylconiine whereas the other one did. To avoid compli-
cation in our work, we decided to use only the Chelsea
variety of C. maculatum.
Sampling techniques. Careful sampling techniques are
essential but previous work on alkaloids in plants has
often shown a lack of appreciation of this requisite (Dawson,
1948). As our studies were restricted to the flower and
fruit we made a careful study of the distribution of the
flowers on the growing plant. The inflorescence is a com-
pound umbel consisting of 10-15 rays, and each ray bears
a secondary umbel with 8-18 flowers. It was noticed that
all the flowers on a given compound umbel developed at
practically the same time but that the stage of develop-
ment varied from compound umbel to compound umbel on
the same plant or even on the same branch. It was there-
fore decided to use the compound umbel, containing on an
average about 150 flowers, as the 'unit'. These compound
umbels are first recognized as small greenish masses of
ALKALOIDS OF HEMLOCK FRUIT
tightly coiled buds which soon developed into a flat head
of fully opened white flowers. This stage was easily recog-
nized and it was assumed that pollination took place then;
this stage was therefore called week 1. In a normal season
it took 7-8 weeks for these pollinated flowers to develop
into fully ripened, almost dehiscent, fruits. At the begin-
ning of this period 250 compound umbels at the stage of
week 1 were tagged by tying a white card just below the
point where the rays arise, and 25 of them were collected
between 9 and 10 a.m. (a.M.T.) the same day each week
during the developing period. From these weekly samples,
containing about 3000-4000 fruits, two groups of 800
fruits were placed in tared stoppered flasks as follows:
(a) with 50 ml. of 70% ethanol (for quantitative chemical
work); (b) for oven-dry weight determination. The re-
mainder of the fruits were reserved for qualitative chemical
examination and for anatomical studies.
The flasks were then re-weighed and the following in-
formation was obtained for each weekly collection: (i) the
average fresh weight ofone fruit; (ii) the average dry weight
of one fruit; (iii) the amount of alkaloids, both total and
individual, per fruit; (iv) the percentage of alkaloids on a
dry-weight and a fresh-weight basis. For the quantitative
chemical work the fruits were allowed to macerate in the
ethanol for at least 7 days before assay and allowance was
made for the amount of water contained in the 800 fruits
added to each 50 ml. of 70% ethanol.
By using this sampling technique we obtained a variety
of reference bases for our quantitative data and were able
to select the most suitable for our purposes and at the same
time compare our results with those of other workers even
when they had used less suitable sampling methods.
The following methods for the determination of total
alkaloids and of individual alkaloids in the fruits were
used.
Measurement of the areas of spots on paper chromatograms.
The methods described by Fisher, Parsons & Morrison
(1948) and Fisher, Parsons & Holmes (1949) for amino
acids was applied to the determination of the hemlock
alkaloids. The results were insufficiently accurate for our
purposes but the method was found to be valuable for
preliminary investigations, especially when dealing with
small quantities of plant material.
Spectrophotometric methods. The gravimetric method of
Farr & Wright (1904) and the titrimetric method of Janot
& Fabre (1929) were considered unsuitable as large quanti-
ties of material were required. Accordingly, a number of
colour reactions reported for the hemlock alkaloids were
investigated with a view to devising suitable spectrophoto-
metric methods. The sodium ,-naphthaquinone-4-sulphate
method of Euler (1945) for piperidine, the chloranilic acid
method of Barreto (1954) for coniine, the cx-nitroso-,-
naphthol method of Reichard (1905) and the carbon di-
sulphide method of Dlling (1909) were all tried but found
to be unsuitable. Cromwell (1956) used two colour re-
actions, based on reactions reported by earlier workers, and
we found his methods the most suitable so far reported.
Certain alterations were made and the following is an
account of the methods we used, together with reasons for
changing those described by Cromwell.
Preliminary extraction of the alkaloids from the fruits.
A suitable volume (40 ml.) of the 70% ethanolic extract
prepared from the weekly collection of fruits was trans-
ferred to an evaporating basin, acidified with 5 ml. of N-
HISO4 and evaporated to small volume on a water bath to
remove most of the ethanol. The contents of the dish were
transferred to a separator, with several rinsings of water
and a final one of chloroform. The aqueous solution was
extracted with chloroform to remove coloured impurities
and the chloroform extracted with 2 x 5 ml. portions of
0-1N-H2SO4, which were added to the original aqueous
solution. The solution was then made alkaline to litmus
with 10% NaOH solution and extracted with successive
portions of chloroform. The mixed chloroform fractions
were shaken with a few drops of concentrated HCI (A.R.)
and the chloroform was removed by evaporation on a
water bath. The mixed hydrochlorides were dried in an
oven at about 900 to remove excess of acid and were dis-
solved in water to 100 ml. This solution was used for
further determinations, each of which was made in dupli-
cate. In no instance did the two results differ by more than
3%. Cromwell recommended micro-steam-distillation for
the preliminary extraction of the alkaloids: we found
this method inconvenient as it was difficult to prevent
overflow of froth into the condenser and at the same
time maintain an adequate pressure of steam through the
mixture.
Determination of the total alkaloids in the fruit. The
following solutions were mixed together in a 50 ml.
separator: a suitable volume (0.5-15-0 ml.) of the solution
of alkaloidal hydrochlorides already referred to, 1 ml. of
phosphate -buffer [0-1M-KH2PO4 adjusted to pH 7 0 with
0-1 M-KOH and Universal indicator (B.D.H. Ltd.)], 5 ml.
of a saturated solution of bromothymol blue in water. The
mixture was then extracted with three 5 ml. quantities of
benzene; each extract was successively dried with 0-5 g. of
anhydrous Na2SO4, transferred to a 20 ml. measuring flask
and made up to volume with further benzene which had
been washed with the Na2SO4 previously used. The ex-
tinction of the yellow solution in benzene was then deter-
mined, with dry benzene as blank, in 0 5 cm. tubes, at
440 mu with the Unicam D.G. spectrophotometer. The
amount of total alkaloid present was calculated from a
calibration curve prepared by using pure coniine hydro-
chloride.
We found that it was necessary to use a larger amount of
bromothymol blue than that stated by Cromwell, as this
indicator must be present in excess in order to complete the
reaction. Moreover, two or three shakings with benzene
are necessary in order completely to extract the coloured
complex from the aqueous layer; furthermore the Na2SO4
used for drying the benzene extract adsorbs an appreciable
amount of the coloured complex, and has therefore to be
extracted with benzene and this fraction added to the
others.
Determination of y-coniceine. To a 20 ml. volumetric
flask were added, in the following order: a suitable volume
(0-5-15-0 ml.) of the solutions of alkaloidal hydrochlorides
already referred to, aqueous 1% sodium nitroprusside
solution (0.6 ml.), aqueous 10% (w/v) Na2CO3 solution
(0 4 ml.). The mixture was made up to volume with water
andthe redcolourproducedwasmeasured at495 mpj. between
7 and 10 min. after the addition of the alkali. Preliminary
work with pure y-coniceine showed that the maximum
colour intensity occurred between 7 and 10 min. and the
peak of the absorption curve was at 495 m,. The amount of
y-coniceine present was calculated from a calibration
curve prepared from pure y-coniceine as follows.
V01. 7:2 557
J. W. FAIRBAIRN AND S. B. CHALLEN
Preparation of pure y-coniceine 8tandard solution. The
leaves of second-year Conium plants, collected in the spring,
were found to be good sources of y-coniceine. Steam-
distillation in the presence of alkali was found unsuitable
as the oily distillate was black. The dried leaf was therefore
extracted in the cold with chloroform-aqueous NH3
solution (sp.gr. 0.880) (25: 1, v/v). The chloroform solution
was washed with water, and was then extracted with 5%
(w/v) tartaric acid solution (we found that y-coniceine
turned pink in mineral acid). The pale-yellow acid solution
was made alkaline to litmus with aqueous KOH and re-
extracted with chloroform; this chloroform solution was
then extracted with x-HCI. At this stage we found it
impossible to prepare pure crystalline y-coniceine hydro-
chloride owing to its deliquescent nature and to the dis-
coloration already referred to. We found, however, that the
reineckate was the most suitable salt for further purifica-
tion. Accordingly a saturated aqueous solution of ammo-
nium reineckate was immediately added to the solution of
y-coniceine in HCI until no further precipitation occurred.
The pink flocculent precipitate was dried in a desiccator
and pure y-coniceine reineckate (m.p. 1430 uncorrected)
obtained by several recrystallizations from acetone-water
(25: 75, v/v). A portion (20 mg.) of this reineckate was dis-
solved in 10 ml. of methanol by warming and the solution
diluted with an equal volume of water. The reineckate ion
was precipitated by titration with aqueous 1% AgNO3
solution until no further precipitate formed. The mixture
was filtered, the precipitate well washed with water and the
filtrate and washings were made up to 100 ml. This solu-
tion contained y-coniceine (70 pg./ml., calculated as the
hydrochloride).
Determination of individual alkaloids (other than y-
coniceine). The method of band chromatography devised
by Cromwell was applied to the solution of alkaloidal
L._
---
b4
'o
0
I959
hydrochlorides already referred to. As this method is
laborious it was used only when information on the
quantities of alkaloids other than y-coniceine and coniine
was required.
RESULTS
As8ay of alkaloids
The results are expressed as weight of alkaloid per
fruit, rather than percentage of dry or fresh weight,
as this gave a more accurate picture of the changes
taking place within an individual fruit. The results
for 1955 and 1956 are summarized in Fig. 1.
Effect of rainfall and sunshine. The 1955 season
was sunny and dry with a total sunshine of 349 hr.
and rainfall of 1-16 in. during the 8 weeks of the
experiment. In 1956 the weather was less sunny
and wetter with a total sunshine of 221 hr. and
rainfall of 8-66 in. during the corresponding 8
weeks. In 1955 the average dry weight of the
fruits and the amount of alkaloid per fruit was
about twice that of the 1956 season. Other effects
on the composition of the alkaloids are discussed
below.
40
20
Coniine
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Time (weeks)
Fig. 1. Diagram showing quantities of individual alkaloids
present during the development of the fruit.
A_ I C./.l.-
Fig. 2. (A). Tissue distribution, as seen in transverse
section, of a mericarp at week 5 ( x 15). 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 8,
(numbers indicate the week of collection): tissue details
of the pericarp ( x 200). b.c.l., Beaker-cell layer; carp.,
carpophore; c.l., coniine layer; end., endodermis; ep.,
epidermis; r., raphe; 8ch.d., schizogenous duct; t.c.,
temporary collenchyma; v.b., vascular bundle.
558
559ALKALOIDS OF HEMLOCK FRUIT
Table 1. Summary of anatomical change8 during development of the fruit8 in 1955
Week Coniine
no. layer
11 Walls not2 1 thickened
3 Inner tangential
walls partially
thickened
4 Both tangential
walls partially
thickened
5 Radial and
tangential walls
thickened
6 Radial and
tangential walls
thickened
7 Walls completely
thickened
8 Walls completely
thickened
Beaker-cell
layer
Walls not
thickened
Walls not
thickened
Inner tangential
walls partially
thickened
Inner tangential
walls partially
thickened
Inner tangential
walls partially
thickened
'Beaker-shaped'
thickening
'Beaker-shaped'
thickening
Temporary
collenchyma
Absent
Absent
Developing
Fully developed
Partially lost.
Some distortion
Lost and tissues
distorted
Lost and tissues
distorted
Schizogenous
ducts
Present
Present
Present
Fully developed
Tangential
compression
begins
Distorted
Distorted
Endosperm
Translucent
Translucent
Translucent
Becoming opaque;
minute crystals
appear
Opaque
Opaque; crystals
at maximum
size
Opaque
Developmental anatny of the fruit
The general arrangement of the tissues, as seen in
transverse section, is shown in Fig. 2. The endocarp
(coniine layer) and the layer of pericarp cells im-
mediately within (which we have called the 'beaker-
cell layer') have long been known to contain
alkaloids (Goris, 1914). Both develop at approxi-
mately the same rate but the ultimate thickening
and pitting of the walls indicate that diffusion of
substances from these layers would be outwards
towards the mesocarp rather than inwards towards
the seed (Fig. 2, 8). In the inner region of the
mesocarp, temporary collenchyma arises in week 4
and disappears in week 7. During this same period
the endosperm tissues reach maturity both in size
and cell contents. There are numerous schizo-
genous ducts (vittae) in the mesocarp but at about
week 4 they cease to develop and never form well-
marked vittae which are so characteristic of most
umbelliferous fruits.
A summary of these changes is given in Table 1
and some of the stages are illustrated in Fig. 2.
Hi8tochemiCal 8tudie8
We used a solution of potassium bismuth iodide
(Munier, 1951) as a general histochemical reagent
for alkaloids, and an alkaline solution of sodium
nitroprusside for piperideines. The latter was used
by placing a thick section (about 0-5 mm.) in a drop
of freshly prepared 1% sodium nitroprusside solu-
tion on a slide, followed by the addition of a drop
of aqueous 10% NH3 solution; if piperideines, such
as y-coniceine, were present a blood red developed.
Fully saturated alkaloids like coniine and con-
hydrine do not give red.
Alkaloid was found in the epidermis and in the
coniine layer at all stages of development, being
particularly abundant aboutweek 5, but its presence
was doubtful in all other tissues. This observation
conflicts with that of earlier workers, whose results
are reviewed by Goris (1914). He states that
coniine occurs in the epidermis, subepidermal
collenchyma, parenchyma adjoining the vascular
bundles and schizogenous ducts and in the coniine
layer and its adjacent one (the beaker-cell layer).
It is completely absent from the seed. Our own
results do not prove that coniine is totally absent
from the other tissues, as Tunman (1931) reports
that potassium bismuth iodide is not sensitive to
Conium alkaloids in concentrations of less than
0-1 %. They do indicate, however, that the alkaloids
are concentrated in the peripheral tissues of the
pericarp, that is, the epidermis and the endocarp.
The distribution of piperideines showed con-
siderable variation. Well-marked reactions were
obtained in the vascular bundles of the carpophore
and pericarp during the entire development of the
fruit. In the raphe and the schizogenous ducts
piperideines were present in the early stages, being
particularly intense in the ducts in week 4, but
only traces were present in the later stages. None
occurred in the coniine and beaker-cell layers until
week 6 and even then the reaction in the coniine
layer was doubtful. This appearance ofpiperideines
in the beaker-cell layer coincided with a general
diffusion of piperideines throughout the pericarp
tissues from week 6 onwards (Table 2).
Aborted mericarps. Abnormal fruits occurred
fairly frequently; in these, one mericarp developed
normally and the other became aborted. Histo-
chemical tests showed that piperideines were
always much more abundant in the aborted meri-
carp than in the normal one.
Vol. 72
J. W. FAIRBAIRN AND S. B. CHALLEN
Table 2. Di8tribution of piperideines in fruits collected in 1956, a8 8hown by the nitroprusside te8t
Colours: i, doubtful red; +, blood red. The tissues referred to are shown in Fig. 2.
Week no. ... ...
Epidermis
Schizogenous ducts
Collenchyma
Beaker-cell layer
Coniine layer
Vascular bundles in pericarp
and carpophore
Raphe and adjoining
parenchyma
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
* *** * * ~~~~~~+
+ + + + + + i:
* * * . . ~ ~~~++
* * * . . ~ ~~~++
* * * . . ~ ~~ ~+i1
+ + + + + + +
+
A:
+
+
A:
+
+ + + + + A: A:
DISCUSSION
Piperideines as precursor8 of the saturated alkaloids
The results illustrated in Fig. 1 show that in both
seasons a peak of y-coniceine content nearly always
preceded a peak of coniine content. This happened
twice in 1955 and shows particularly well in 1956,
between weeks 5 and 6, when the y-coniceine
dropped rapidly and the coniine increased corre-
spondingly. These results are in agreement with
those of Cromwell (1956), who found that in
growing seedlings and young leaves y-coniceine
predominated but that as the vegetative parts
matured so the content of coniine increased.
Similarly, in the development from flower to fruit
the overall picture was of the y-coniceine content
decreasing as the coniine content increased. There-
fore y-coniceine may well be the precursor of
coniine. The results of our histochemical studies are
also in agreement with this hypothesis, since they
indicate that piperideines enter the fruit by the
conducting tissues and the schizogenous ducts and
that in the latter they appear to reach a maximum
concentration in week 4, the same week as that in
which total alkaloids are also at a maximum.
Interchange between saturated and
unsaturated alkaloid8
y-Coniceine seems to be the predominant alka-
loid during rainy weather. Thus in both seasons the
maximum alkaloidal content was at week 4, but in
the comparatively dry conditions of 1955 coniine
was the predominant alkaloid whereas in the
wetter season of 1956 y-coniceine predominated at
the corresponding stage. Further, between weeks 5
and 6 in 1956 there was a marked reduction in the
y-coniceine content (and a corresponding increase
in coniine). This was paralleled by a very marked
reduction of rainfall. Since the overall effect of the
dry 1955 season was an increase in growth it may
well be that the change from y-coniceine to the
saturated alkaloids is associated with active
growth. This is supported by a consideration of the
anatomical studies, which also indicate that this
change is reversible.
Anatomical studies of the 1955 samples showed
that the rapid increase in alkaloidal content
occurred while the pericarp was increasing in size,
up to weeks 4 and 5. During this time piperideines
were abundant in the schizogenous ducts (which are
possibly important sources of alkaloid precursors)
and vascular tissue; the coniine and beaker-cell
layers increased in size but gave reactions for
saturated alkaloids only. Presumably piperideines
are transported to the pericarp during this period
of rapid development, are hydrogenated or
hydrated and then deposited in the coniine and
beaker-cell layers as saturated alkaloids. In the
aborted mericarp, on the other hand, no such rapid
development takes place and the piperideines
accumulate to a much greater extent than in the
corresponding normal mericarp. After week 4 the
alkaloidal content falls. This is paralleled by the
gradual distortion of the schizogenous ducts and a
reduction in their piperideine content. At the same
time the seed begins to mature and it may be in
connexion with this further metabolic activity that
additional changes take place in the alkaloidal
content. Piperideines begin to appear in the coniine
and beaker-cell layers and become generally
diffused throughout the pericarp (Table 2).
Chemical analyses confirm that there is an in-
crease in y-coniceine from weeks 5 to 6 (Fig. 1).
These results indicate that the 'piperideine pool'
associated with this second phase of metabolic
activity is partly derived from the stores of
coniine in the coniine and beaker-cell layers. It
has already been pointed out that the thickening
of the walls of these cells would favour a diffusion
from them into the pericarp. The conversion of
piperideines into saturated alkaloids may there-
fore be reversible. A similar situation has been
shown to occur in certain Senecio species, where
the alkaloids occur either in an oxidized or a
reduced form according to reversible reactions
of hydrogenation and varying degrees of hydra-
tion (Areschkina, 1957). We intend investigating
further this possibility that the hemlock alka-
loids are connected with oxidation-reduction
mechanisms.
560 I959
Vol. 72 ALLOIDS OF HEMLOCK FRUIT 561
A88ay figureB for total alkaloid8
We found that in both seasons the maximum
percentage ofalkaloids (dry-weight basis) was about
3%. This is considerably higher than the figures
usually quoted (Farr & Wright, 1904; Madaus &
Schindler, 1938; Cromwell, 1956), and is probably
due to the careful sampling technique we em-
ployed. A sample collected haphazardly from
several plants on any given day will contain fruits
at many stages of development and this would lead
to a lowering of the assay value. Fawr & Wright
(1904) state that the highest percentage of alka-
loids occurs when the fruit is green, and the results
given by Cromwell (1956) indicate a mxmum in
mature green fruits. Our results show that these
statements should be modified, for the maximum
occurred in 1955 when the fruiits were just begin-
ning to turn yellow, whereas in 1956 the fruits were
still quite green after the period of alkaloidal
maximum. In 1955 the total alkaloid per firuit was
twice that ofthe friuit in 1956; at the same time the
dry weight was also doubled so that the assay
figures for the two seasons were similar. Increased
alkaloidal production is therefore associated with
the general improvement in growth and vigour.
SUMMARY
1. A study of the changes occurring during the
development of the flower to the fruit of (onium
maoulatm L. has been made.
2. The changes in the composition and quantity
of alkaloids were investigated simultaneously with
the changes in anatomical structure and in
reactions to histochemical tests.
3. A carefully chosen sample of seeds was used
and crops from two successive seasons were
harvested. Special sampling techniques and
methods of analysis were devised.
4. The climatic conditions in the two seasons
differed; in the sunnier season the average weight of
the fruits and amount of alkaloids was twice that
of the wetter season.
5. In both seasons the maximum alkaloidal
content occurred 3 weeks after fertilization of the
ovule; in the wet season, however, y-conioeine (an
unsaturated alkaloid) predominated at this stage;
in the dry season coniine (a saturated alkaloid)
predominated.
6. In both seasons a peak of y-coniceine content
preceded a peak of coniine content.
7. It is suggested that y-coniceine and other
piperideines are the precursors of the saturated
alkaloids such as coniine and conhydrine and this
change is associated with active growth. This
change may be reversible.
The work described in this paper forms part of a thesis
presented by one of us (S. B. Challen) for the award of a
Ph.D. degree of the University of London. We would like
to thank Mr J. F. Rogers, Head Gardener at Myddelton
House, for his valuable assistance in the cultivation of the
hemlock plants.
REFERENCES
Areschkina, L. Y. (1957). Biokhimiya, 22, 527.
Barreto, A. (1954). Agronomia, Rio de J., 13, 45.
Cromwell, B. T. (1956). Biochem. J. 64, 259.
Dawson, R. F. (1948). Advanc. Enzymol. 8, 203.
Dilling, W. J. (1909). Pharm. J. (rv), 29, (iv), 34, 70, 102.
Euler, U. S. von (1945). Acta pharm. tox., Kbh., 1, 29.
Farr, E. H. & Wright, R. (1904). Pharm. J. (Iv), 18, 185.
Fisher, R. B., Parsons, D. S. & Holmes, R. (1949). Nature,
Lond., 164, 183.
Fisher, R. B., Parsons, D. S. & Morrison, G. A. (1948).
Nature, Lond., 161, 764, 765.
Goris, A. (1914). Localization et Role des Alcaloid,9 et des
Glucoie, p. 116. Paris: Lechevalier.
Janot, H. & Fabre, C. (1929). Bull. Sci. pharm. 386, 529.
Madaus, G. & Schindler, H. (1938). Arch. Pharm., Berl.,
276, 280.
Munier, R. (1951). Bull. Soc. Chim. biol., Paris, 83, 846.
Reichard, C. (1905). Pharm. Zentralh. 40, 252.
Tunman, 0. (1931). Pflanzen-Milcrochemie, p. 315. Berlin:
Borntraeger.
The Point of the Aerobic Inhibition of Glycolytic
Activity Associated with Brain Mitochondria
BY R. BALAZS
Medical Re8earch Council NeuropmychiaWic Re8earch Unit, Whitchurch Ho8pitaW, Cardiff
(Received 25 Augu8t 1958)
One of the oldest-known controlling mechanims of
metabolic processes at the cellular level is the
aerobic sparing effect on glucose utilization.
Warburg (1926) defined this effect as follows:
'Respiration and glycolysis are linked by a chemical
reaction which I call the Pasteur reaction after its
discoverer.' This reaction has been the subject of a
large number of investigations (cf. reviews by
Burk, 1937, 1939; Dixon, 1937; Liprarm, 1942;
Dickens, 1951; Krebs, 1957). However, the eluci-
dation of the mechanism and of the point of in-
hibition in the glycolytic chain has been hampered
by the fact that the effect was obtained only in
whole-cell preparations, where permeability factors
36 Bioch. 1959, 72
