Stephen F. Austin State UniversitySFA ScholarWorksNCPC Publications and Patents National Center for Pharmaceutical Crops9-2013Curcumin-Free Turmeric Exhibits Anti-inflammatory and Anticancer Activities:Identification of Novel Components of Turmeric(Abstract)Bharat AggarwalWei YuanStephen F Austin State University, Arthur Temple College of Forestry and Agriculture, yuanw@sfasu.eduShiyou LiStephen F Austin State University, Arthur Temple College of Forestry and Agriculture, lis@sfasu.eduSubash C. GuptaFollow this and additional works at: http://scholarworks.sfasu.edu/ncpc_articlesPart of the Pharmacology, Toxicology and Environmental Health CommonsTell us how this article helped you.This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the National Center for Pharmaceutical Crops at SFA ScholarWorks. It has been accepted forinclusion in NCPC Publications and Patents by an authorized administrator of SFA ScholarWorks. For more information, please contactcdsscholarworks@sfasu.edu.Recommended CitationAggarwal, Bharat; Yuan, Wei; Li, Shiyou; and Gupta, Subash C., "Curcumin-Free Turmeric Exhibits Anti-inflammatory and AnticancerActivities: Identification of Novel Components of Turmeric (Abstract)" (2013). NCPC Publications and Patents. Paper 2.http://scholarworks.sfasu.edu/ncpc_articles/2Curcumin-Free Turmeric Exhibits Anti-inflammatory and Anticancer Activities: Identification of Novel Components of Turmeric  Abstract  Turmeric, a dried powder derived from the rhizome of Curcuma longa, has been used for centuries in certain parts of the world and has been linked to numerous biological activities including antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, anticancer, antigrowth, anti-arthritic, anti-atherosclerotic, antidepressant, anti-aging, antidiabetic, antimicrobial, wound healing, and memory-enhancing activities. One component of turmeric is curcumin, which has been extensively studied, as indicated by more than 5600 citations, most of which have appeared within the past decade. Recent research has identified numerous chemical entities from turmeric other than curcumin. It is unclear whether all of the activities ascribed to turmeric are due to curcumin or whether other compounds in turmeric can manifest these activities uniquely, additively, or synergistically with curcumin. However, studies have indicated that turmeric oil, present in turmeric, can enhance the bioavailability of curcumin. Studies over the past decade have indicated that curcumin-free turmeric (CFT) components possess numerous biological activities including anti-inflammatory, anticancer, and antidiabetic activities. Elemene derived from turmeric is approved in China for the treatment of cancer. The current review focuses on the anticancer and anti-inflammatory activities exhibited by CFT and by some individual components of turmeric, including turmerin, turmerone, elemene, furanodiene, curdione, bisacurone, cyclocurcumin, calebin A, and germacrone.    