Plant Physiol. (1989) 89, 1351-1357
0032-0889/0000/1351 /07/$01 .00/0
Received for publication July 1, 1988
and in revised form December 2, 1988
Biochemical and Histochemical Localization of
Monoterpene Biosynthesis in the Glandular Trichomes of
Spearmint (Mentha spicata)" 2
Jonathan Gershenzon, Massimo Maffei3, and Rodney Croteau*
Institute of Biological Chemistry, Washington State University, Pullman, Washington 99164-6340
ABSTRACT
The primary monoterpene accumulated in the glandular tri-
chomes of spearmint (Mentha spicata) is the ketone (-)-carvone
which is formed by cyclization of the C10 isoprenoid intermediate
geranyl pyrophosphate to the olefin (-)-limonene, hydroxylation
to (-)-trans-carveol and subsequent dehydrogenation. Selective
extraction of the contents of the glandular trichomes indicated
that essentially all of the cyclase and hydroxylase activities
resided in these structures, whereas only about 30% of the
carveol dehydrogenase was located here with the remainder
located in the rest of the leaf. This distribution of carveol dehy-
drogenase activity was confirmed by histochemical methods.
Electrophoretic analysis of the partially purified carveol dehydro-
genase from extracts of both the glands and the leaves following
gland removal indicated the presence of a unique carveol dehy-
drogenase species in the glandular trichomes, suggesting that
the other dehydrogenase found throughout the leaf probably
utilizes carveol only as an adventitious substrate. These results
demonstrate that carvone biosynthesis takes place exclusively
in the glandular trichomes in which this natural product accumu-
lates.
Many kinds of lipophilic natural products accumulate in
modified epidermal hairs known as glandular trichomes (17).
Prominent among these substances are various types of ter-
penes, including the monoterpenes and sesquiterpenes of the
essential oils. It has been generally assumed that the terpenes
found in glandular trichomes are synthesized there, since
gland cells display many ultrastructural features indicative of
active lipid metabolism and secretion (17, 29). However, the
difficulties of identifying terpene secretion products micro-
scopically have precluded definite proof of this assumption
by ultrastructural methods.
Direct evidence for the biosynthetic capabilities ofglandular
trichomes has come from studies showing that these structures
can incorporate labeled precursors such as sucrose, acetate,
and mevalonate into terpenes (9). In tobacco, glandular tri-
chomes appear to be the sole site for the synthesis of duvane-
'This investigation was supported in part by U.S. Department of
Energy grant (DE-FG06-88ER1 3869) and by Project 0268 from the
Agricultural Research Center, Washington State University, Pullman,
WA 99164.
2 Dedicated to the memory of W. R. Nes, colleague and friend.
Present address: Istituto di Botanica Speciale, University ofTurin,
Italy.
1351
type diterpenes found in the glandular exudate. The head cells
oftobacco trichomes are the only leaf cells able to incorporate
radiolabeled acetate into duvane diterpenes; removal of these
cells severely reduces or eliminates duvane production (22).
Thus, it is tempting to speculate that all terpenes found in
glandular trichomes are synthesized in situ. However, recent
reports of monoterpene synthesis by undifferentiated cells in
culture (5, 28), coupled to evidence for monoterpene transport
in intact plants (7, 31), suggest that the site of synthesis may
not necessarily be the same as the site of accumulation.
Spearmint (Mentha spicata, Lamiaceae) accumulates large
quantities of monoterpenes in glandular trichomes, the major
constituent of which is (-)-carvone (20). This monocyclic
ketone is biosynthesized by a three step pathway (Fig. 1) in
which the ubiquitous primary intermediate geranyl pyrophos-
phate is cyclized to the olefin (-)-limonene4 (23), which is
then hydroxylated by a cytochrome P450-dependent mono-
oxygenase to (-)-trans-carveol (F Karp, R Croteau, unpub-
lished data). (-)-trans-Carveol is subsequently dehydrogen-
ated to (-)-carvone. This last enzymic step has not been
previously demonstrated in spearmint, but has ample prece-
dent in monoterpene metabolism in other systems (16, 24).
The site of monoterpene biosynthesis in spearmint was
studied by investigating the locations of the enzymes catalyz-
ing the three steps in carvone biosynthesis. Procedures for the
selective extraction ofenzymes from glandular trichomes were
used (12, 18), which allowed comparison of cell-free prepa-
rations from the trichomes with those of whole leaves from
which the glandular trichomes had been removed. Also, since
the final step in carvone biosynthesis is mediated by a dehy-
drogenase, histochemical techniques for studying this enzyme
type (26, 32) were employed to probe the cellular and sub-
cellular location of this activity.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Plant Materials and Reagents
Spearmint (Mentha spicata L.) plants were grown from
stolons under controlled conditions as previously described
(1 1). Newly emerged leaves (3-20 mm long) were used in all
experiments. Polystyrene resin (Amberlite XAD4; Rohm and
Haas) was prepared for use by standard procedures (27). All
4Nomenclature used is based on the p-menthane system: (-)-
limonene = 4S-p-mentha- 1(2),8(9)-diene; (-)-trans-carveol = 2S,4R-
p-mentha-l(6),8(9)-dien-2-ol; (-)-carvone = 4R-p-mentha-1(6),8(9)-
dien-2-one.
 www.plantphysiol.orgon January 27, 2020 - Published by Downloaded from 
Copyright © 1989 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.
Plant Physiol. Vol. 89, 1989
Geranyl
pyrophosphate
(-)-Limonene
0/*. 0
3
(-)-trans-Carveol (-)-Carvone
Figure 1. Pathway for the biosynthesis of (-)-carvone from geranyl
pyrophosphate in spearmint. The enzymes involved are geranyl py-
rophosphate: (--limonene cyclase (1), (--limonene hydroxylase (2),
and (--trans-carveol dehydrogenase (3).
other reagents were purchased from Aldrich or Sigma Chem-
ical Co. unless otherwise noted.
Enzyme Extracts
Extracts ofglandular trichomes were prepared by two meth-
ods. For the first method, leaves were submerged in prechilled
extraction buffer and gently brushed with a soft-bristle tooth-
brush (12). The extraction buffer was 100 mm sodium/potas-
sium phosphate (pH 6.5), containing 1 M sucrose, 5 mM
MgCl2, 10 mm Na2S205, 50 mm ascorbic acid, 4 mM DTT
(Research Organics), 1 mm EDTA, polyvinylpolypyrrolidone
(1 g/g leaf), and XAD-4 resin (2 g/g leaf). This procedure
removed approximately 40 to 60% ofthe glandular trichomes
present on the leaf surface as determined microscopically.
For the second method, extracts were prepared by a mech-
anized procedure in which the leaf surfaces were gently
abraded with small glass beads (18). Briefly, 5 to 15 g batches
of leaves were extracted using a Bead-Beater cell disrupter
(Biospec Products) containing 200 g of0.5 mm diameter glass
beads (Biospec Products) and prechilled extraction buffer
(formulated as described above) added to nearly full volume
of the 10 ounce polycarbonate chamber. Extraction was car-
ried out in twenty 15 s pulses of operation with the rotor
speed controlled by a rheostat set at 110 V. Between pulses,
the polycarbonate chamber was dismounted and cooled on
ice for at least 15 s. This procedure resulted in removal of
more than 99% of the glandular trichomes as determined
microscopically.
Leaves recovered from the second gland extraction proce-
dure were manually homogenized in a Ten-Broeck homoge-
nizer to obtain extracts of whole leaves from which the
glandular trichomes had been removed. Homogenization was
carried out in the same extraction buffer, without XAD-4,
but with additional polyvinylpolypyrrolidone (0.5 g/g leaf).
Following homogenization, the extract was slurried with
XAD-4 (1 g/g leaf) for 5 min.
All extracts were filtered by passage through eight layers of
premoistened cheesecloth and then four layers of80 ,um nylon
mesh (Small Parts, Inc.). Filtered extracts were centrifuged at
195,000g for 2 h. The supernatants obtained were divided
into several portions, dialyzed to specific assay conditions as
noted below, and then concentrated by ultrafiltration (Ami-
con YM-30) to a small volume suitable for assay. The
195,000g pellets were resuspended in extraction buffer, man-
ually homogenized, stirred with XAD (1 g/g leaf) to ensure
complete removal of endogenous monoterpenes, filtered
through cheesecloth and nylon mesh, and centrifuged again
at 195,000g for 2 h. The resulting pellets were resuspended in
the appropriate buffers for assay.
Assay for Geranyl Pyrophosphate: (-)-Limonene Cyclase
This activity was measured in a 15 mm sodium/potassium
phosphate buffer, containing 10% (v/v) glycerol, 5 mM ascor-
bic acid, and 1 mM DTT. One-mL aliquots of the various
extracts were added to Teflon-sealed, screw-capped tubes and
the reaction initiated by addition of 20 mM MgCl2 and 18 jM
[I -3H]geranyl pyrophosphate (90 Ci/mol) which was synthe-
sized and purified by literature procedures (15). As a trap for
the volatile olefin products, 1 mL of pentane was carefully
layered on top of the reaction mixture. Following incubation
at 30C for 1 h with gentle shaking, the reaction was stopped
by vigorous mixing. The limonene generated was extracted
from the reaction mixture, and the 3H content determined by
chromatographic separation and liquid scintillation counting
essentially as previously described (23). The cyclase activity
was almost completely restricted (98%) to the 195,000g
supernatants.
Assay for (-)-Limonene Hydroxylase
This activity was determined by incubating 1 mL aliquots
of the preparation in 25 mm sodium/potassium phosphate
buffer (pH 7.4), containing 30% (v/v) glycerol and 0.5 mM
DTT, with 2 mm NADPH and 200 nmol (-)-limonene (op-
tical purity > 80%) for 1 h at 30°C. The reaction was stopped
by addition of 1 mL diethyl ether followed by vigorous
shaking to extract the (-)-trans-carveol formed. After addition
of 25 nmol camphor as an internal standard, the ether layer
was removed and the reaction mixture reextracted twice with
additional 1 mL portions of ether. The combined ether ex-
tracts were decolorized with charcoal, washed with 1 mL of
water, passed through a short column of silica gel (type 60A,
Mallinckrodt) overlaid with anhydrous MgSO4 in a Pasteur
pipet, and concentrated to 200 ,L under vacuum (Savant
Speed Vac).
Reaction products were analyzed by GLC (Hewlett Packard
5890A with 3392A integrator) using a bonded-phase fused-
silica open-tubular capillary column (30 m x 0.25 mm i.d.)
coated with a 0.2 ,um film of Superox FA (Ailtech Associates)
and operated with H2 (2 mL/min), on-column injection (in-
jector temperature ambient), temperature programming (45°
for 5 min, then 10°/min to 2200 with 15 min hold), and flame
ionization detector (detector temperature 230C). (-)-trans-
Carveol was identified by comparison of retention time and
mass spectrum with an authentic standard and was quanti-
tated by comparison of detector response to that of the
internal standard. Control assays extracted immediately after
substrate addition (i.e. zero time) were used to determine the
background ofendogenous volatile substances in each extract.
The small amounts of trans-carveol usually found in these
control assays were subtracted from those produced in full-
term assays to determine enzymic production. Limonene
hydroxylase activity was found only in the 195,000g pellet,
and was not evident in boiled preparations of this type.
Assay for (-)-trans-Carveol Dehydrogenase
One-mL aliquots of the extract in 100 mm sodium/potas-
sium phosphate buffer (pH 8.0), containing 10% (v/v) glycerol
1 352 GERSHENZON ET AL.
 www.plantphysiol.orgon January 27, 2020 - Published by Downloaded from 
Copyright © 1989 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.
LOCALIZATION OF MONOTERPENE BIOSYNTHESIS IN SPEARMINT TRICHOMES
and 1 mM DTT, were incubated in the presence of 1 mM
NADP and 200 nmol (-)-carveol (62% trans, 38% cis, SCM
Specialty Chemicals) for 1 h at 30°C. Reaction products were
extracted with ether and analyzed by GLC as described above
for hydroxylase assays. Only the (-)-trans-carveol isomer was
enzymically oxidized to (-)-carvone. Carveol dehydrogenase
activity was principally confined (about 90%) to the 195,000g
supernatants.
Partial Purification of (-)-trans-Carveol Dehydrogenase
Carveol dehydrogenase preparations from glandular tri-
chome extracts and whole-leaf (minus trichomes) extracts
were purified separately for electrophoretic comparison. After
extraction, filtration and centrifugation as detailed above, the
supernatants were dialyzed against 100 mm sodium/potas-
sium phosphate buffer (pH 7.0), containing 10% (v/v) glyc-
erol, 2 mm ascorbic acid, 1 mM DTT, and 1 mm EDTA, and
then concentrated by ultrafiltration (Amicon YM-30) to vol-
umes of approximately 10 mL. Powdered (NH4)2SO4 was
added until 25% saturation was achieved and the precipitated
protein was removed by centrifugation at 27,000g for 10 min.
The supernatants were then brought to 60% saturation with
(NH4)2S04 and centrifuged again. The resulting pellets con-
tained over 97% of the carveol dehydrogenase activity origi-
nally present in the extracts. These preparations were sus-
pended in a minimum volume of 100 mm phosphate buffer
(pH 8.0), containing 10% (v/v) glycerol, 1 mm ascorbic acid,
0.5 mM DTT, and 0.5 mM EDTA, and applied to a 2.5 x 110
cm column of Sephacryl S-200 (Pharmacia) equilibrated with
the same buffer. The column was pumped at a flow rate of
25 mL/h, and 5.3 mL fractions were collected and assayed
for carveol dehydrogenase activity, which eluted at approxi-
mately 1.55 void volumes. Fractions containing the dehydro-
genase were combined, concentrated by ultrafiltration and,
after a buffer change by which 1% (w/v) sorbitol was substi-
tuted for the 10% (v/v) glycerol, the preparation was lyophi-
lized and stored under N2 at -25°C. As a result of these steps,
the total purification of carveol dehydrogenase was 30- to 40-
fold and recovery was 60 to 80%.
Separation of Dehydrogenase Activities by PAGE
A comparison between carveol dehydrogenase activities
located in the glandular trichomes and those located in the
rest of the leaf was made by nondenaturing discontinuous
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis of the corresponding par-
tially purified preparations. Vertical slab gels (16 cm x 18 cm
x 1 mm) employing the discontinuous system of Laemmli
(25) were cast with a separating gel of 7.5% acrylamide. Prior
to loading the sample, the slab gel was subjected to electro-
phoresis at 40 mA constant current to remove the residual
persulfate used in polymerization (21). Lyophilized prepara-
tions of carveol dehydrogenase, partially purified as described
above, were dissolved in a buffer, formulated to preserve
catalytic activity, that contained 50 mM diazabicyclooctane
(pH 9.0), 25% (w/v) sucrose, 6 mm 3-mercaptopropionic acid,
5 mm ascorbic acid, 1 mm DTT, and 20 mM NaCl. Aliquots
containing from 50 to 200 ,ug protein were loaded into 1 cm-
wide wells. Two gels at a time were run in a Hofer SE 600
vertical slab gel apparatus with a 4°C cooling bath at a constant
current of40 mA for 3 h (approximately 1000 V/h). Standard
electrode buffers (25 mm Tris, 192 mM glycine) according to
Laemmli (25) were used, but the cathode buffer also contained
1 mm sodium thioglycolate, 3 mM 3-mercaptopropionic acid,
and 1 mM EDTA to aid in persulfate removal (4).
Gel slices were stained for carveol dehydrogenase activity
by incubation in 100 mm phosphate buffer (pH 8.0), contain-
ing 0.4 mm nitroblue tetrazolium, 0.065 mM phenazine meth-
osulfate, 0.75 mM NAD, and saturating levels of (-)-carveol.
Incubation was carried out for approximately 2 h in the dark
in a sealed glass bottle that had been purged with N2. Stained
slices were scanned at 633 nm with an LKB 2202 Ultroscan
laser densitometer. Control slices assayed without (-)-carveol,
or from runs without enzyme, showed no detectable bands.
Protein concentrations were estimated using the BioRad
protein assay based upon the dye-binding technique of Brad-
ford (3) with BSA as the standard.
Histochemical Localization of (-)-trans-Carveol
Dehydrogenase
Immature leaves (5-10 mm) collected before the plants
flowered were cut in halfand incubated immediately with the
reaction mixture described below in Teflon-sealed screw-
capped tubes covered with aluminum foil. Incubation was
carried out for 45 min at 30°C with gentle agitation. The
composition of the reaction mixture, based on previous stud-
ies of dehydrogenase histochemistry (26, 32) and extensive
preliminary trials, was 20 mm sodium cacodylate (pH 7.5), 3
mM MgCl2, 1% (w/v) sucrose, 2% (w/v) polyvinylpyrrolidone
(Mr 360,000), 0.01% (v/v) Tween 20, 0.6 mm nitroblue tet-
razolium, 1 mm phenazine methosulfate, 0.5 mM NADP, and
0.5 mM (-)-carveol. Reaction conditions were optimized in a
series of experiments by varying concentrations of nitroblue
tetrazolium, phenazine methosulfate, NADP, (-)-carveol,
and incubation time. Tween 20 was added to enhance tissue
penetration of the hydrophobic substrate, while sucrose and
polyvinylpyrrolidone reduced browning of the tissue. A brief
(10 s) dip of the leaves in pentane prior to incubation signifi-
cantly enhanced the apparent reaction rate, presumably by
removing cuticle wax and thereby assisting substrate uptake.
Direct comparisons were made between leaves incubated with
the above reaction mixture and controls incubated without
carveol. To distinguish carveol dehydrogenase from alcohol
(ethanol) dehydrogenase activity, experiments were also un-
dertaken with 0.5 mm ethanol as a substrate in place of
carveol, and by including in the reaction mixture 15 mm
pyrazole, an inhibitor of alcohol dehydrogenase.
After incubation, the leaves were rinsed with 20 mm sodium
cacodylate (pH 7.0) for 20 min and then fixed with 3% (v/v)
glutaraldehyde in 20 mm sodium cacodylate buffer for 1 h.
Fixation prior to incubation greatly reduced the rate of the
dehydrogenase reaction. After washing the fixed tissue with
sodium cacodylate for 30 min, the leaves were postfixed with
1% (W/V) OS04 in 10 mm sodium cacodylate (pH 7.0) for 90
min at room temperature, then washed with distilled water
for 45 min, dehydrated in a graded ethanol series ending with
100% propylene oxide, and embedded in Spurr's low viscosity
resin (30). Silver-gold thin sections were obtained with a
Reichert OM U2 ultramicrotome. Sections were stained with
lead citrate, uranyl acetate, and lead citrate again, in sequence
1 353
 www.plantphysiol.orgon January 27, 2020 - Published by Downloaded from 
Copyright © 1989 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.
Plant Physiol. Vol. 89, 1989
-,4 a
.
*4 cu"
SC
t.".,. i
I:,
"f;
i.,
-t
1..:
./. :., g
I'AL
_ek
5
1 354 GERSHENZON ET AL.
 www.plantphysiol.orgon January 27, 2020 - Published by Downloaded from 
Copyright © 1989 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.
LOCALIZATION OF MONOTERPENE BIOSYNTHESIS IN SPEARMINT TRICHOMES
(14) and viewed with a Hitachi H-300 transmission electron
microscope.
RESULTS
Localization of Carvone Biosynthetic Capability by Cell-
Free Assays
To determine whether (-)-carvone biosynthesis takes place
specifically in the glandular trichomes of spearmint, the activ-
ities ofthe enzymes associated with the relevant pathway were
measured in cell-free extracts ofthe glandular trichomes. Two
types of procedures were employed to extract selectively the
glandular contents. In the first method, leaves were submerged
in extraction buffer and then gently brushed with a toothbrush
to obtain a glandular trichome extract containing the material
from only 40 to 60% of the glandular trichomes present on
the leaf surface, but with essentially no contamination from
underlying tissue (12). All three enzymes involved in the
synthesis of carvone from the ubiquitous isoprenoid inter-
mediate geranyl pyrophosphate (i.e. the cyclase, hydroxylase,
and dehydrogenase) were readily detected in this extract in-
dicating that the glandular trichomes were capable of carvone
biosynthesis.
To determine the biosynthetic capability of the trichome
extract relative to that of the rest of the leaf, a second experi-
ment was performed using a more efficient procedure for
gland removal. Leaf surfaces were abraded with glass beads
(18) to remove over 99% of all the glandular trichomes (Figs.
2 and 3) without extensive damage to the underlying leaf
tissue. Using this method, an extract of the contents of vir-
tually all of the glandular trichomes on the leafwas obtained.
The remaining leaf tissue was extracted by homogenization
to give a preparation representing the leaf free of gland con-
tents. Comparison of these two extracts showed that two of
the three enzymes of the carvone pathway, geranyl pyrophos-
phate: (-)-limonene cyclase and (-)-limonene hydroxylase,
were almost completely restricted to the glandular trichomes
(Table I). The traces of these two activities in the remainder
of the leaf probably result from incomplete removal of glan-
dular trichomes from this preparation. The third enzyme, (-)-
trans-carveol dehydroganase, was found in substantial
amounts in both the glandular trichomes and the rest of the
leaf (Table I).
Histochemical Localization of Carveol Dehydrogenase
To confirm that carveol dehydrogenase activity is present
throughout the cells of the leaf, an adaptation of a commonly
used method for histochemical localization ofdehydrogenases
was employed. This method is based on the reduction of
tetrazolium salts to insoluble formazans by NADPH, with
phenazine methosulfate as an intermediate electron carrier
(26, 32). Leaf sections were incubated with nitroblue tetrazo-
lium, phenazine methosulfate, NADP, and the substrate (-)-
trans-carveol, and then fixed and prepared for transmission
electron microscopy. The presence of carveol dehydrogenase
was indicated by small dark granules of formazan precipitate.
Formazan granules were found in cells of all tissues of the
leaf, including the epidermis, the palisade layer, the spongy
parenchyma, the vascular bundles, and both types of glan-
dular trichomes, peltate and capitate (Fig. 4). Granules in the
glandular trichomes were associated with the smooth endo-
plasmic reticulum (Fig. 6), while granules in the cells of the
rest ofthe leafwere often associated with smooth endoplasmic
reticulum, and also with other membrane systems (Fig. 7).
Controls incubated without carveol showed only sporadic
reaction zones in some mesophyll cells, with no consistent
subcellular location (Fig. 5). To examine the possibility that
the putative carveol dehydrogenase activity was due to alcohol
(ethanol) dehydrogenase, leaf sections were incubated with
ethanol as a substrate under otherwise identical conditions.
The reaction attributed to alcohol dehydrogenase activity was
observed only in mesophyll cells and was localized near the
plasmalemma (Fig. 8), a pattern clearly distinguishable from
that produced by carveol dehydrogenase. Pyrazole, an inhib-
itor of alcohol dehydrogenase, also inhibited the reaction of
carveol dehydrogenase and was thus not useful as a diagnostic
tool. Therefore, the summation of both histochemical and in
vitro results were consistent, and indicated that carveol de-
hydrogenase activity is present in glandular trichomes and in
the rest of the leaf.
Electrophoretic Comparison of Carveol Dehydrogenase
Activities from Glandular Trichomes and the Remaining
Leaf
The oxidation of carveol is the final step in carvone biosyn-
thesis and it therefore seems unlikely that the alcohol would
Figures 2 and 3. Scanning electron micrographs (x90) of spearmint leaf surfaces before (Fig. 2) and after (Fig. 3) selective removal of the
glandular trichomes with glass beads (PT, peltate glandular trichomes). More than 99% of these structures were removed by this method.
Arrows in Figure 3 show former locations of glandular trichomes. Samples for scanning electron microscopy were air-dried ovemight at room
temperature and gold-coated. Specimens were viewed with an ETEC Autoscan U-1 at 30 kV.
Figures 4-8. Histochemical localization of carveol dehydrogenase in sections of young spearmint leaves. Leaves were incubated with the
reaction mixtures described in "Materials and Methods," then fixed and prepared for transmission electron microscopy. The presence of carveol
dehydrogenase is indicated by a precipitate of formazan granules.
Figure 4. Peltate glandular trichome and adjacent mesophyll following incubation with carveol showing a precipitate in all tissues (CU, cuticle;
SS, subcuticular space; SC, secretory cell; ST, stalk cell; BC, basal cell; E, epidermis; M, mesophyll) (x1370).
Figure 5. Control section incubated without carveol, showing only sporadic precipitate in the mesophyll (x1370).
Figure 6. Section of a secretory cell illustrating the subcellular location (arrows) of carveol dehydrogenase in smooth endoplasmic reticulum
(SER) (x68,400).
Figure 7. Mesophyll cell showing precipitate associated with smooth endoplasmic reticulum and other membrane systems (CW, cell wall)
(x 1 3,700).
Figure 8. Subcellular localization of alcohol (ethanol) dehydrogenase (arrows) near the plasmalemma of a mesophyll cell indicating that carveol
dehydrogenase and alcohol dehydrogenase are not equivalent (x13,700).
1355
 www.plantphysiol.orgon January 27, 2020 - Published by Downloaded from 
Copyright © 1989 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.
Plant Physiol. Vol. 89, 1989
Table I. Localization of Enzymes of Carvone Biosynthesis in
Spearmint Extracts
Glandular trichomes were first removed from the leaves by abra-
sion with glass beads, and the remaining leaves were then homoge-
nized. The preparation and assay of each enzyme is described in
"Materials and Methods."
Activity
GlandularEnzyme Glandular Remaining trchomes
trichomes leaf
nkat/kg tissue %
Geranyl pyrophosphate: 5220 25.0 99.5
(--limonene cyclase
(-)Limonene hydroxylase 150 5.6 96.4
(-)-trans-Carveol dehydro- 8080 18,100 30.9
genase
cv,
co
%us
C.)
a)
CO
co
a
U1)
0)
0
L-
ID
-c:
m
a)
0
U1)
L..
0o
40 50 60
Mobility (mm)
70
Figure 9. PAGE of partially purified carveol dehydrogenase prepa-
rations from glandular trichomes (A) and from the remainder of the
leaf following gland removal (B). Gels were run, stained, and scanned
as described under "Materials and Methods." The glandular trichome
extract contains two species of carveol dehydrogenase activity,
whereas the extract of the remainder of the leaf contains only the
slower migrating species.
be transported out of the glandular trichomes for conversion
to the ketone and then transported back into the trichomes
for storage. Rather, it seems more probable that carveol
oxidation would occur within the trichomes, perhaps cata-
lyzed by a unique species of dehydrogenase. To evaluate this
possibility, the carveol dehydrogenase activities from both the
glandular trichome extract and the remaining leaf (free of
trichomes) extract were separately purified by combination of
(NH4)2S04 precipitation and gel filtration. The activities from
both extracts coeluted on gel filtration. However nondena-
turing PAGE, stained to reveal carveol dehydrogenase activ-
ity, displayed significant differences between the two prepa-
rations. Only a single staining band was present in the tri-
chome-free leaf extracts, whereas two bands of activity were
present in extracts of the glandular trichomes (Fig. 9). The
slower moving and less intense of these two bands had the
same mobility as the single band in the trichome-free leaf
extract. A plausible interpretation is that the dehydrogenase
unique to the glandular trichome extract is the enzyme re-
sponsible for carveol oxidation in the intact plant (such highly
selective monoterpenol dehydrogenases have been previously
reported in other plants [8, 16]), whereas the enzyme present
in both extracts represents a dehydrogenase activity found in
all tissues which, while capable of oxidizing carveol under in
vitro conditions, is probably not associated with monoterpene
biosynthesis in vivo. Thus, the enzymes responsible for the
entire pathway of carvone biosynthesis in spearmint appear
to be restricted to the glandular trichomes.
DISCUSSION
For many years, glandular trichomes have been regarded
as the primary site of monoterpene synthesis in mints and
related essential oil plants (1, 9, 17). The present results
demonstrate that these structures are in fact the sole sites of
monoterpene biosynthesis in the leaves of spearmint. In con-
junction with the work of Keene and Wagner on the diter-
penes oftobacco (22), it can now be suggested that all terpenes
accumulated in, or exuded from, glandular trichomes are
probably synthesized in these highly specialized structures.
Since monoterpene alcohols are known to be transported as
glycosides (7, 31) (i.e. in mature peppermint (+)-neomethyl-
f3-D-glucoside is transported from leaves to rhizomes and
catabolized at this site [10]), it is conceivable that the mono-
terpenes of spearmint are first synthesized elsewhere in the
leaf and then transported to the glandular trichomes. How-
ever, this possibility appears to be eliminated by the present
results. Additionally, it is extremely unlikely that monoter-
penes are biosynthesized elsewhere in the plant since stem
and root extracts are devoid of limonene cyclase activity (J
Gershenzon, R Croteau, unpublished data).
Because monoterpene synthesis is restricted to the glandular
trichomes, it is evident that the timing of gland ontogeny will
directly influence the concentration ofmonoterpenes in a leaf
and how this varies throughout leaf development. Typically,
most glandular trichomes are initiated very early in leaf
development and begin to accumulate monoterpenes before
the leaves are 5 mm long (1). Therefore, monoterpene con-
centrations (per gram tissue) are relatively high in young
leaves and decline with further development (13).
Ultrastructural studies have concluded that terpene synthe-
sis within the glandular trichome occurs principally in the
secretory cells rather than the stalk cell or the basal cell (see
Fig. 4) (17, 29); the present results support this generalization.
Carveol dehydrogenase activity, as indicated by the presence
of formazan granules, was always much more prominent in
secretory cells than in other cell types for both peltate and
capitate trichomes. At the subcellular level, carveol dehydro-
genase activity in spearmint secretory cells was associated
with smooth endoplasmic reticulum. This result is somewhat
surprising in light ofthe observation that the carveol dehydro-
A
B
I I
1356 GERSHENZON ET AL.
 www.plantphysiol.orgon January 27, 2020 - Published by Downloaded from 
Copyright © 1989 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.
LOCALIZATION OF MONOTERPENE BIOSYNTHESIS IN SPEARMINT TRICHOMES
genase was operationally soluble (>90% ofthe activity resided
in the 195,000g supernatant) and suggests that the enzyme is
released from membranes during tissue extraction (2). How-
ever, the subcellular localization of carveol dehydrogenase
must be viewed with some caution since, in the histochemical
procedures used in this study, NADPH and phenazine meth-
osulfate are freely diffusible and so may produce artefacts
(26). Smooth endoplasmic reticulum has been frequently
observed in cells assumed to produce terpene secretions ( 17,
19, 29). Yet, the lack of suitable methods for identifying
terpenoids under the electron microscope has prevented any
ultrastructural demonstration of the direct involvement of
smooth endoplasmic reticulum in terpene biogenesis. Re-
cently, however, the synthesis of sesquiterpene olefins in
Citrofortunella mitis fruits was shown to be associated with a
membrane fraction containing endoplasmic reticulum (2).
Another type of organelle often linked with monoterpene
synthesis is the leucoplast, a plastid ofcomplex shape without
thylakoids (6). Plastids of this description were present in the
secretory cells of spearmint glandular trichomes. However,
no histochemical evidence was found for the association of
carveol dehydrogenase activity with these organelles. Leuco-
plasts in spearmint glands might serve as compartments for
some of the earlier steps of monoterpene synthesis. Detailed
evaluation of the localization of monoterpene biogenesis at
the subcellular level must await the development of immu-
nochemically based techniques.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Greg Wichelns for raising the plants, Nancy Madsen for
typing the manuscript, and the staff of the Electron Microscopy
Center, Washington State University, for assistance.
LITERATURE CITED
1. Amelunxen F (1965) Elektronenmikroskopische Untersuchungen
an den Druisenschuppen von Mentha piperita L. Planta Med
13: 457-473
2. Belingheri L, Pauly G, Gleizes M, Marpeau A (1988) Isolation
by an aqueous two-polymer phase system and identification of
endomembranes from Citrofortunella mitis fruits for sesquiter-
pene hydrocarbon synthesis. J Plant Physiol 132: 80-85
3. Bradford MM (1976) A rapid and sensitive method for the
quantitation of microgram quantities of protein utilizing the
principle of protein-dye binding. Anal Biochem 72: 248-254
4. Brewer JM (1967) Artifact produced in disc electrophoresis by
ammonium persulfate. Science 156: 256-257
5. Charlwood BV, Charlwood KA (1983) The biosynthesis ofmono-
and sesquiterpenes in tissue culture. Biochem Soc Trans 11:
592-593
6. Cheniclet C, Carde J-P (1985) Presence ofleucoplasts in secretory
cells and of monoterpenes in the essential oil: a correlative
study. Isr J Bot 34: 219-238
7. Croteau R (1987) Biosynthesis and catabolism of monoterpen-
oids. Chem Rev 87: 929-954
8. Croteau R, FeltonM (1980) Substrate specificity ofmonoterpenol
dehydrogenases from Foeniculum vulgare and Tanacetum vul-
gare. Phytochemistry 19: 1343-1347
9. Croteau R, Johnson MA (1984) Biosynthesis of terpenoids in
glandular trichomes. In E Rodriguez, PL Healy, I Mehta, eds,
Biology and Chemistry of Plant Trichomes. Plenum, New
York, pp 133-185
10. Croteau R, Martinkus C (1979) Metabolism of monoterpenes:
Demonstration of (+)-neomenthyl-fl-D-glucoside as a major
metabolite of (-)-menthone in peppermint (Mentha piperita).
Plant Physiol 64: 169-175
11. Croteau R, Venkatachalam KV (1986) Metabolism of monoter-
penes: Demonstration that (+)-cis-isopulegone, not piperiten-
one, is the key intermediate in the conversion of (-)-isopiper-
itenone to (+)-pulegone in peppermint (Mentha piperita). Arch
Biochem Biophys 249: 306-315
12. Croteau R, Winters JN (1982) Demonstration ofthe intercellular
compartmentation of l-menthone metabolism in peppermint
(Mentha piperita). Plant Physiol 69: 975-977
13. Croteau R, Felton M, Karp F, Kjonaas R (1981) Relationship of
camphor biosynthesis to leaf development in sage (Salvia
officinalis). Plant Physiol 67: 820-824
14. Daddow LYM (1983) A double lead stain method for enhancing
contrast of ultrathin sections in electron microscopy: a modi-
fied multiple staining technique. J Microsc 129: 147-153
15. Davisson VJ, Woodside AB, Poulter CD (1985) Synthesis of
allylic and homoallylic isoprenoid pyrophosphates. Methods
Enzymol 110: 130-144
16. Dehal SS, Croteau R (1987) Metabolism of monoterpenes: spec-
ificity of the dehydrogenases responsible for the biosynthesis
of camphor, 3-thujone and 3-isothujone. Arch Biochem Bio-
phys 258: 287-291
17. Fahn A (1979) Secretory Tissues in Plants. Academic Press, New
York
18. Gershenzon J, Duffy MA, Karp F, Croteau R (1987) Mechanized
techniques for the selective extraction of enzymes from plant
epidermal glands. Anal Biochem 163: 159-164
19. Gleizes M, Carde J-P, Pauly G, Bernard-Dagan C (1980) In vivo
formation of sesquiterpene hydrocarbons in the endoplasmic
reticulum of pine. Plant Sci Lett 20: 79-90
20. Guenther E (1974) The Essential Oils, Vol III (reprinted). Krieger,
Huntington, NY, p 681
21. Heeb MJ, Gabriel 0 (1984) Enzyme localization in gels. Meth-
ods Enzymol 104: 416-439
22. Keene CK, Wagner GJ (1985) Direct demonstration of duvatri-
enediol biosynthesis in glandular heads of tobacco trichomes.
Plant Physiol 79: 1026-1032
23. Kjonaas R, Croteau R (1983) Demonstration that limonene is
the first cyclic intermediate in the biosynthesis of oxygenated
p-menthane monoterpenes in Mentha piperita and other Men-
tha species. Arch Biochem Biophys 220: 79-89
24. KJonaas R, Venkatachalam KV, Croteau R (1985) Metabolism
of monoterpenes: Oxidation of isopiperitenol to isopiperiten-
one, and subsequent isomerization to piperitenone by soluble
enzyme preparations from peppermint (Mentha piperita)
leaves. Arch Biochem Biophys 238: 49-60
25. Laemmli UK (1970) Cleavage of structural proteins during the
assembly of the head of bacteriophage T4. Nature 227: 680-
685
26. Lewis PR (1977) Other cytochemical methods for enzymes. In
AM Glauert, ed, Practical Methods in Electron Microscopy,
Vol 5. North-Holland, Amsterdam, pp 225-287
27. Loomis WD, Lile JD, Sandstrom RP, Burbott AJ (1979) Adsor-
bent polystyrene as an aid in plant enzyme isolation. Phyto-
chemistry 18: 1049-1054
28. Nabeta K, Ohnishi Y, Hirose T, SugisawaH (1983) Monoterpene
biosynthesis by callus tissues and suspension cells from Perilla
species. Phytochemistry 22: 423-425
29. Schnepf E (1974) Gland cells. In AW Robards, ed, Dynamic
Aspects of Plant Ultrastructure. McGraw-Hill, London, pp
331-357
30. SpurrAR (1969) A low-viscosity epoxy resin embedding medium
for electron microscopy. J Ultrastruct Res 26: 31-43
31. Stahl-Biskup E (1987) Monoterpene glycosides, state-of-the-art.
Flavour Fragr J 2: 75-82
32. Van Noorden CJF (1984) Histochemistry and Cytochemistry
of Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase. Gustav Fischer,
Stuttgart
1357
 www.plantphysiol.orgon January 27, 2020 - Published by Downloaded from 
Copyright © 1989 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.
