ar
X
iv
:h
ep
-p
h/
97
05
40
4v
1 
 2
3 
M
ay
 1
99
7
TTP97-21
hep-ph/9705404
May 1997
CP VIOLATION IN Bs DECAYS
a
ROBERT FLEISCHER
Institut fu¨r Theoretische Teilchenphysik, Universita¨t Karlsruhe,
D–76128 Karlsruhe, Germany
CP-violating effects in non-leptonic Bs-meson decays are reviewed. Special em-
phasis is given to implications arising from the width difference ∆Γs between the
Bs mass eigenstates. If ∆Γs is found to be sizable, certain untagged Bs-meson
decays may allow interesting probes of CP violation, extractions of the CKM angle
γ and the Wolfenstein parameter η, and may indicate physics beyond the Standard
Model.
1 Introduction
A characteristic feature of the neutral Bq-meson systems (q ∈ {d, s}) is B0q−B0q
mixing. The corresponding time-evolutions are governed by the Bq mass eigen-
states BHeavyq and B
Light
q which are characterized by their mass eigenvalues
M
(q)
H , M
(q)
L and decay widths Γ
(q)
H , Γ
(q)
L . Because of these mixing effects, oscil-
latory ∆Mqt terms with ∆Mq ≡M (q)H −M (q)L show up in the time-dependent
transition rates Γ(B0q (t)→ f) and Γ(B0q (t)→ f) describing decays of initially
present B0q and B
0
q mesons into a final state f , respectively. Essentially all the
information that is needed to evaluate these decay rates is contained in the
convention-independent observable 1
ξ
(q)
f = exp
[
−iΘ(q)M12
] A(B0q → f)
A(B0q → f)
, (1)
where Θ
(q)
M12
is the weakB0q–B
0
q mixing phase that is related to 2 arg(V
∗
tqVtb) and
the A’s denote the decay amplitudes corresponding to B0q → f and B0q → f .
It is a well-known feature that ξ
(q)
f can be calculated in a clean way if
Bq → f is dominated by a single CKM amplitude (see e.g. Ref. 1 for a recent
discussion). The “gold-plated” mode in this respect isBd → J/ψKS measuring
sin(2 β) with excellent accuracy through mixing-induced CP violation.2 The Bs
system plays an important role to determine γ – another angle of the usual
“non-squashed” unitarity triangle of the CKM matrix.
A decay that was proposed frequently in the previous literature to ac-
complish this task is Bs → ρ0KS. However, this mode is unfortunately not
dominated by a single CKM amplitude. Here penguin contributions lead to
aInvited plenary talk given at the 2nd International Conference on B Physics and CP
Violation, Honolulu, Hawaii, March 24–27, 1997. To appear in the proceedings.
serious problems so that
ξ
(s)
ρ0KS
≈ exp(−i 2 γ) (2)
is a very bad approximation.1 Consequently Bs → ρ0KS should be the “wrong”
way to extract γ. Needless to note, the branching ratio of that decay is expected
to be of O(10−7) which makes its experimental investigation very difficult.
Before focussing on other Bs modes that do allow meaningful determinations
of γ, let us turn to an experimental problem of Bs decays that is related to
time-dependent measurements.
2 The Bs System in Light of ∆Γs
The “strength” of the B0q−B0q oscillations is measured by the mixing parameter
xq ≡ ∆Mq/Γq, where Γq ≡ (Γ(q)H + Γ(q)L )/2. While we have xd = 0.72 ± 0.03
in the Bd system, a large Bs mixing parameter xs = O(20) is expected within
the Standard Model implying very rapid B0s −B0s oscillations (see e.g. Ref. 3).
In order to keep track of the corresponding ∆Mst terms in the time-dependent
Bs decay rates, an excellent vertex resolution system is required which is a
formidable experimental task.
It may, however, not be necessary to trace these rapid ∆Mst oscillations
in order to obtain insights into the mechanism of CP violation.4 This remark-
able feature is due to the expected sizable width difference ∆Γs ≡ Γ(s)H − Γ(s)L
originating mainly from CKM favored b¯ → c¯cs¯ transitions into final states
that are common both to B0s and B
0
s . The width difference ∆Γs may be as
large as O(20%) of the average decay width Γs as is indicated by box dia-
gram calculations 5, a second complementary approach 6 where one sums over
many exclusive b¯ → c¯cs¯ modes, and by an approach using the “Heavy Quark
Expansion” leading to the most recent result 7 |∆Γs|/Γs = 0.16+0.11−0.09. This
width difference can be determined experimentally e.g. from angular correla-
tions in Bs → J/ψ φ decays.8 One expects 103−104 reconstructed Bs → J/ψ φ
events both at Tevatron Run II and at HERA-B which may allow a precise
measurement of ∆Γs.
Because of this width difference already untagged Bs rates, which are
defined by
Γ[f(t)] ≡ Γ(B0s (t)→ f) + Γ(B0s (t)→ f) , (3)
may provide valuable information about the phase structure of the observable
ξ
(s)
f defined by Eq. (1). This can be seen nicely by writing Eq. (3) in a more
2
explicit way as follows:
Γ[f(t)] ∝
[(
1 +
∣∣∣ξ(s)f
∣∣∣2
)(
e−Γ
(s)
L
t + e−Γ
(s)
H
t
)
− 2Re ξ(s)f
(
e−Γ
(s)
L
t − e−Γ(s)H t
)]
.
(4)
In this expression the rapid oscillatory ∆Mst terms, which show up in the
tagged rates, cancel. Therefore it depends only on the two exponents e−Γ
(s)
L
t
and e−Γ
(s)
H
t. From an experimental point of view such untagged analyses are
clearly much more promising than tagged ones in respect of efficiency, accep-
tance and purity.
In order to illustrate these untagged strategies in more detail, let me discuss
an estimate of γ from Bs → K+K− and Bs → K0K0 decays.9 Using the
SU(2) isospin symmetry of strong interactions to relate the QCD penguin
contributions to these decays (electroweak penguins are color-suppressed in
these modes and thus play a minor role 1) yields
Γ[K+K−(t)] ∝ |P |2
[(
1−2 |r| cosρ cos γ+|r|2 cos2 γ)e−Γ(s)L t+|r|2 sin2 γ e−Γ(s)H t]
(5)
and
Γ[K0K0(t)] ∝ |P |2 e−Γ(s)L t , (6)
where
r ≡ |r|eiρ = |T ||P |e
i(δT−δP ) . (7)
Here P denotes the b¯ → s¯ QCD penguin amplitude, T is the color-allowed
b¯→ u¯us¯ tree amplitude, and δP and δT are the corresponding CP-conserving
strong phases. In order to determine γ from the untagged rates Eqs. (5)
and (6), an additional input is needed. Using the SU(3) flavor symmetry of
strong interactions to this end and neglecting color-suppressed current-current
contributions to B+ → π+π0 gives
|T | ≈ λ fK
fpi
√
2 |A(B+ → π+π0)| , (8)
where λ = 0.22 is the Wolfenstein parameter 10, fK and fpi are the K and π
meson decay constants, respectively, and A(B+ → π+π0) denotes the appro-
priately normalized B+ → π+π0 decay amplitude. Since |P | is known from
Bs → K0K0, the quantity |r| = |T |/|P | can be estimated with the help of
Eq. (8) and allows an estimate of γ from the part of Eq. (5) evolving with
exponent e−Γ
(s)
H
t. If more reliable ways to fix |T | should become available in
the future, this “estimate” of γ may well turn into a solid determination.
3
3 Bs Decays into Admixtures of CP Eigenstates
One can even do better than in the previous section, i.e. without using SU(3)
flavor symmetry, by considering decays corresponding to Bs → KK where two
vector mesons or higher resonances are present in the final states.9
3.1 An Extraction of γ using Bs → K∗+K∗− and Bs → K∗0K∗0
The untagged angular distributions of these decays, which are given explic-
itly in Ref. 9, provide many more observables than the untagged modes Bs →
K+K− and Bs → K0K0 discussed in the previous section. In the case of
Bs → K∗0K∗0 the formulae simplify considerably since it is a penguin-induced
b¯ → s¯dd¯ mode and receives therefore no tree contributions. Using again the
SU(2) isospin symmetry of strong interactions, the QCD penguin contributions
to Bs → K∗+K∗− and Bs → K∗0K∗0 can be related to each other. If one takes
into account these relations and goes very carefully through the observables of
the untagged angular distributions, one finds that they allow the extraction of
the CKM angle γ without any additional theoretical input.9 Needless to note,
the angular distributions provide moreover information about the hadroniza-
tion dynamics of these decays. Since the formalism 9 for Bs → K∗+K∗−
applies also to Bs → ρ0φ, it may allow insights into the physics of electroweak
penguins as the latter mode is dominated by these operators.1
3.2 The “Gold-plated” Transitions to Extract η
This subsection is devoted to the decays Bs → D∗+s D∗−s and Bs → J/ψ φ,
which is the counterpart of the “gold-plated” mode Bd → J/ψKS to measure
the CKM angle β. Since these decays are dominated by a single CKM ampli-
tude, the hadronic uncertainties cancel in ξ
(s)
f which takes in that particular
case the form 9
ξ
(s)
f = exp(i φCKM) . (9)
Consequently the observables of the angular distributions simplify consider-
ably. A characteristic feature of these angular distributions is interference
between CP-even and CP-odd final state configurations leading to observables
that are proportional to (
e−Γ
(s)
L
t − e−Γ(s)H t
)
sinφCKM . (10)
Here the CP-violating weak phase is given by φCKM = 2λ
2η ≈ O(0.03), where
λ and η are two of the Wolfenstein parameters.10 The observables of the an-
gular distributions for both the color-allowed channel Bs → D∗+s D∗−s and the
4
color-suppressed transition Bs → J/ψ φ each provide sufficient information to
determine the CP-violating weak phase φCKM from their untagged data sam-
ples thereby fixing the Wolfenstein parameter η.9 Note that this extraction of
φCKM is not as clean as that of β from Bd → J/ψKS. This feature is due to
the smallness of φCKM with respect to β.
Within the Standard Model one expects a very small value of φCKM and
Γ
(s)
H < Γ
(s)
L . However, that need not to be the case in many scenarios for
“New Physics”.11 An experimental study of the decays Bs → D∗+s D∗−s and
Bs → J/ψ φ may shed light on this issue, and an extracted value of φCKM
much larger than O(0.03) would indicate physics beyond the Standard Model.
4 Bs Decays caused by b¯→ u¯cs¯ (b→ cu¯s)
The Bs decays discussed in this section are pure tree decays, i.e. receive no
penguin contributions, and probe the CKM angle γ in a clean way.12 There
are by now well-known strategies on the market using the time evolutions of
such modes, e.g.
(—)
Bs→
(—)
D0 φ12,13 and
(—)
Bs→ D±s K∓ 14, to extract γ. However, in
these strategies tagging is essential and the rapid ∆Mst oscillations have to be
resolved which is an experimental challenge. The question what can be learned
from untagged data samples of these decays, where the ∆Mst terms cancel, was
investigated by Dunietz.4 In the untagged case the determination of γ requires
additional inputs: a measurement of the untagged Bs → D0CPφ rate in the case
of the color-suppressedmodes
(—)
Bs→
(—)
D0 φ, and a theoretical input corresponding
to the ratio of the unmixed rates Γ(B0s → D−s K+)/Γ(B0s → D−s π+) in the case
of the color-allowed decays
(—)
Bs→ D±s K∓. This ratio can be estimated with the
help of the “factorization” hypothesis which may work reasonably well for these
color-allowed channels.15
Interestingly the untagged data samples may exhibit CP-violating effects
that are described by observables of the form
Γ[f(t)]− Γ[f(t)] ∝
(
e−Γ
(s)
L
t − e−Γ(s)H t
)
sin ̺f sin γ . (11)
Here ̺f is a CP-conserving strong phase shift and γ is the usual angle of the
unitarity triangle. Because of the sin ̺f factor, a non-trivial strong phase shift
is essential in that case. Consequently the CP-violating observables Eq. (11)
vanish within the factorization approximation predicting ̺f ∈ {0, π}. Since
factorization may be a reasonable working assumption for the color-allowed
modes
(—)
Bs→ D±s K∓, the CP-violating effects in their untagged data samples
5
are expected to be very small. On the other hand, the factorization hypothesis
is very questionable for the color-suppressed decays
(—)
Bs→
(—)
D0 φ and sizable CP
violation may show up in the corresponding untagged rates.4
Concerning such CP-violating effects and the extraction of γ from untagged
Bs decays, the modes
(—)
Bs→ D∗±s K∗∓ and
(—)
Bs→
(—)
D∗0 φ are expected to be more
promising than the transitions discussed above. As was shown in Ref. 16, the
time-dependences of their untagged angular distributions allow a clean extrac-
tion of γ without any additional input. The final state configurations of these
decays are not admixtures of CP eigenstates as in Section 3. They can instead
be classified by their parity eigenvalues. A characteristic feature of the angular
distributions is interference between parity-even and parity-odd configurations
that may lead to potentially large CP-violating effects in the untagged data
samples even when all strong phase shifts vanish. Therefore one expects even
within the factorization approximation, which may apply to the color-allowed
modes
(—)
Bs→ D∗±s K∗∓, potentially large CP-violating effects in the correspond-
ing untagged data samples.16 Since the soft photons in the decays D∗s → Dsγ,
D∗0 → D0γ are difficult to detect, higher resonances exhibiting significant all-
charged final states, e.g. Ds1(2536)
+ → D∗+K0, D1(2420)0 → D∗+π− with
D∗+ → D0π+, may be more promising for certain detector configurations. A
similar comment applies also to the mode Bs → D∗+s D∗−s discussed in Subsec-
tion 3.2.
5 Conclusions
Whereas Bs → ρ0KS is expected to be the “wrong” way to extract γ because
of hadronic uncertainties related to penguin contributions, there are other Bs
decays which should allow meaningful determinations of this CKM angle. Some
of these strategies are even theoretically clean and suffer from no hadronic
uncertainties.
Within the Standard Model one expects very rapid B0s − B0s oscillations
which may be too fast to be resolved with present vertex technology. How-
ever, the corresponding ∆Mst terms cancel in untagged rates of Bs decays
that depend therefore only on the two exponents e−Γ
(s)
L
t and e−Γ
(s)
H
t. If the
width difference ∆Γs is sizable – as is expected from theoretical analyses – un-
tagged Bs decays may allow the determination both of the CKM angle γ and
of the Wolfenstein parameter η. Following these lines one may furthermore
obtain valuable insights into the mechanism of CP violation thereby getting
indications for physics beyond the Standard Model.
6
Obviously the feasibility of such untagged Bs strategies to search for CP
violation and to extract CKM phases depends crucially on a sizable width dif-
ference ∆Γs. Moreover a lot of statistics is required so that hadron machines
seem to be the natural place for such experiments. It is not yet clear whether
the Bs width difference will turn out to be large enough to make these mea-
surements possible. However, even if it should be too small, once ∆Γs 6= 0 has
been found experimentally, the formulae developed in Refs. 9,16 have also to
be used to determine CKM phases correctly from tagged Bs decays. Certainly
time will tell and hopefully an exciting future of CP violation in Bs decays is
ahead of us.
Acknowledgment
I am grateful to Isi Dunietz for a collaboration on topics presented in this talk.
References
1. R. Fleischer, hep-ph/9612446, invited review article for publication in
Int. J. Mod. Phys. A (1997).
2. N.G. Deshpande, these proceedings.
3. A.J. Buras and R. Fleischer, hep-ph/9704376, to appear in Heavy
Flavours II, Eds. A.J. Buras and M. Lindner (World Scientific, Singa-
pore, 1997).
4. I. Dunietz, Phys. Rev. D52, 3048 (1995).
5. A.J. Buras et al., Nucl. Phys. B245, 369 (1984); M.B. Voloshin et al.,
Yad. Fiz. 46, 181 (1987) [Sov. J. Nucl. Phys. 46, 112 (1987)]; A. Datta
et al., Phys. Lett. B196, 382 (1987) and Nucl. Phys. B311, 35 (1988);
see also Ref. 6.
6. R. Aleksan et al., Phys. Lett. B316, 567 (1993).
7. M. Beneke, G. Buchalla and I. Dunietz, Phys. Rev. D54, 4419 (1996).
8. A.S. Dighe et al., Phys. Lett. B369, 144 (1996).
9. R. Fleischer and I. Dunietz, Phys. Rev. D55, 259 (1997).
10. L. Wolfenstein, Phys. Rev. Lett. 51, 1945 (1983).
11. L. Wolfenstein, these proceedings.
12. R. Aleksan et al., hep-ph/9312338.
13. M. Gronau and D. London, Phys. Lett. B253, 483 (1991).
14. R. Aleksan, I. Dunietz and B. Kayser, Z. Phys. C54, 653 (1992).
15. B. Stech, these proceedings.
16. R. Fleischer and I. Dunietz, Phys. Lett. B387, 361 (1996).
7
