Frontiers in Plant ScienceOPEN ACCESSEDITED BYKexuan Tang,Shanghai Jiao Tong University, ChinaREVIEWED BYTariq Khan,University of Malakand,
PakistanEbiamadon Andi Brisibe,University of Calabar, Nigeria*CORRESPONDENCEAdam Richard-Bollansa.richard-bollans@kew.orgRECEIVED 24 February
2023ACCEPTED 20 April 2023PUBLISHED 25 May 2023CITATIONRichard-Bollans A, Aitken C, Antonelli A,Bitencourt C, Goyder D, Lucas E, Ondo I,Pérez-Escobar
OA, Pironon S,Richardson JE, Russell D, Silvestro D,Wright CW and Howes M-JR (2023)Machine learning enhances prediction ofplants as potential sources
of antimalarials.Front. Plant Sci. 14:1173328.doi: 10.3389/fpls.2023.1173328COPYRIGHT© 2023 Richard-Bollans, Aitken, Antonelli,Bitencourt, Goyder, Lucas,
Ondo,Pérez-Escobar, Pironon, Richardson, Russell,Silvestro, Wright and Howes. This is anopen-access article distributed under theterms of the Creative
Commons AttributionLicense (CC BY). The use, distribution orreproduction in other forums is permitted,provided the original author(s) and thecopyright
owner(s) are credited and thatthe original publication in this journal iscited, in accordance with acceptedacademic practice. No use, distribution
orreproduction is permitted which does notcomply with these terms.TYPE Original ResearchPUBLISHED 25 May 2023DOI 10.3389/fpls.2023.1173328Machine
learning enhancesprediction of plants as potentialsources of antimalarialsAdam Richard-Bollans1*, Conal Aitken1,2,Alexandre Antonelli 1,3,4, Cássia
Bitencourt1, David Goyder1,Eve Lucas1, Ian Ondo1, Oscar A. Pérez-Escobar1,Samuel Pironon1,5, James E. Richardson6,7,8,9, David Russell 1,Daniele
Silvestro3,10,11, Colin W. Wright12 andMelanie-Jayne R. Howes1,131Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, United Kingdom, 2EaStCHEM, School of Chemistry,
Universityof St Andrews, St Andrews, United Kingdom, 3Gothenburg Global Biodiversity Centre, Department ofBiological and Environmental Sciences, University of
Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden,4Department of Biology, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 5UN Environment ProgrammeWorld Conservation Monitoring Centre (UNEP-WCMC), Cambridge, United Kingdom, 6School ofBiological, Earth and Environmental Sciences, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland, 7Tropical DiversitySection, Royal Botanic Garden, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 8Departamento de Biologı́a, Facultad deCiencias Naturales, Universidad del Rosario, Bogotá, Colombia, 9Environmental Research Institute,University College Cork, Cork, Ireland, 10Department of Biology, University of Fribourg, Fribourg,Switzerland, 11Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Fribourg, Switzerland, 12School of Pharmacy and MedicalSciences, University of Bradford, Bradford, United Kingdom, 13Institute of Pharmaceutical Science, King’sCollege London, Franklin-Wilkins Building, London, United KingdomPlants are a rich source of bioactive compounds and a number of plant-derivedantiplasmodial compounds have been developed into pharmaceutical drugs for theprevention and treatment of malaria, a major public health challenge. However,identifying plants with antiplasmodial potential can be time-consuming and costly.One approach for selecting plants to investigate is based on ethnobotanicalknowledge which, though having provided some major successes, is restricted toa relatively small group of plant species. Machine learning, incorporatingethnobotanical and plant trait data, provides a promising approach to improve theidentification of antiplasmodial plants and accelerate the search for new plant-derived antiplasmodial compounds. In this paper we present a novel dataset onantiplasmodial activity for three flowering plant families – Apocynaceae,Loganiaceae and Rubiaceae (together comprising c. 21,100 species) – anddemonstrate the ability of machine learning algorithms to predict theantiplasmodial potential of plant species. We evaluate the predictive capability of avariety of algorithms – Support Vector Machines, Logistic Regression, GradientBoosted Trees and Bayesian Neural Networks – and compare these to twoethnobotanical selection approaches – based on usage as an antimalarial andgeneral usage as a medicine. We evaluate the approaches using the given dataand when the given samples are reweighted to correct for sampling biases. In bothevaluation settings each of the machine learning models have a higher precisionthan the ethnobotanical approaches. In the bias-corrected scenario, the SupportVector classifier performs best– attaining amean precision of 0.67 compared to thebest performing ethnobotanical approach with a mean precision of 0.46. We alsouse the bias correction method and the Support Vector classifier to estimate thefrontiersin.org01Richard-Bollans et al. 10.3389/fpls.2023.1173328Frontiers in Plant Sciencepotential of plants to provide novel antiplasmodial compounds. We estimate that7677 species in Apocynaceae, Loganiaceae and Rubiaceae warrant furtherinvestigation and that at least 1300 active antiplasmodial species are highlyunlikely to be investigated by conventional approaches.
While traditional andIndigenous knowledge remains vital to our understanding of people-plantrelationships and an invaluable source of information,
these results indicate a vastand relatively untapped source in the search for new plant-derivedantiplasmodial compounds.KEYWORDSmalaria,
traditional and indigenous knowledge, machine learning, botany, ethnobotany,sampling bias, antiplasmodial activity, ethnopharmacology1
IntroductionMalaria is a life-threatening disease that affected 247 million peopleglobally in 2021, with a disproportionately high number of cases (95%)
occurring in Africa (WHO, 2022b). Although global case incidence,deaths and mortality rates for malaria have fallen over the past twodecades,
this downward trend has plateaued since 2015 and there werean estimated 619,000 malaria deaths in 2021 (WHO, 2022b). The twomain treatments for the most prominent malaria-causing species,Plasmodium falciparum and P. vivax, are chloroquine andartemisinin-based combination therapies (involving artemisinin orderivatives). In 2008, due to chloroquine resistance, the WorldHealth Organisation (WHO) recommended that P. falciparuminfections should be treated with artemisinin-based combinationtherapies instead of chloroquine (WHO, 2008), but chloroquineresistance still persists (Ocan et al., 2019). Resistance to existingantimalarial drugs is an escalating challenge for eliminating malaria,indeed, there is concerning evidence of strains partially resistant toartemisinin emerging in Africa (Uwimana et al., 2020). As a result, theWHO recommends that research into antimalarial medicines shouldbe accelerated as part of an effort to reach global malaria targets(WHO, 2022b).Plants have provided or inspired the development of numerouspharmaceutical drugs (Howes et al., 2020; Newman and Cragg, 2020),including those on the WHO’s Model List of Essential Medicines(WHO et al., 2021). In the context of malaria, both chloroquine andartemisinin are derived from plants – chloroquine being a syntheticanalogue of quinine, fromCinchona L. species (Rubiaceae: Gentianales)(Meshnick and Dobson, 2001) while artemisinin is extracted fromsweet wormwood, Artemisia annua L. (Asteraceae: Asterales)(Qinghaosu Antimalaria Coordinating Research group, 1979).Furthermore, the antimalarial drug atovaquone was inspired by thechemical lapachol, which occurs in Tabebuia Gomes ex DC. species(Bignoniaceae: Lamiales) (Milliken et al., 2021). These are excellentexamples of the natural solutions offered by plants and motivate thesearch for further plant-derived antimalarial drugs, particularly in thecontext of emerging resistance to existing antimalarials.02The predominant plant selection approach in the search for newantiplasmodial compounds has been an ethnobotanical one, that is,plants are investigated pharmacologically based on a history oftraditional usage for malaria or other fever-causing diseases. Thisapproach has provided some major successes, for example, thedevelopment of both quinine and artemisinin arose from traditionalethnobotanical knowledge (Qinghaosu Antimalaria CoordinatingResearch group, 1979; Meshnick and Dobson, 2001). However, thisapproach is restricted to a relatively small group of plant species and islimited in terms of reliability. It is therefore timely to assess whetheremerging technologies, such as machine learning, could be used tomore reliably harness the potential of plants as sources of new leadcompounds for drug development.Here we investigate the potential of three flowering plant familiesfrom the order Gentianales –Apocynaceae, Loganiaceae and Rubiaceae– selected based on numerous taxa being sources of chemically diversealkaloids, a compound class of particular pharmaceutical relevance(Daley and Cordell, 2021). Some examples of antiplasmodial alkaloidsfrom these families are given in Figure 1. Antiplasmodial activity inthese families has been relatively well studied, in part due to thepresence of the potent antiplasmodial alkaloids, quinine and the isomerquinidine, from the Cinchona genus. The phytochemistry of thesefamilies has also been relatively well studied, including numerousreports on the presence of alkaloids, for example, (Muhammad et al.,2003; Suksamrarn et al., 2003; Federici et al., 2009; Wong et al., 2011;Daley and Cordell, 2021). Furthermore, from an ethnobotanicalperspective, these families contain many species which are usedtraditionally to treat malaria (Milliken et al., 2021).Our first aim is to assess whether machine learning models can betrained on plant trait data to predict the antiplasmodial activity ofplants. To achieve this, we present a dataset for the three study plantfamilies, quantifying the known antiplasmodial activity of species aswell as a broad range of potentially salient predictors of activity, whichwe will use to train and test machine learning models. We compare theperformance of the machine learning models with two ethnobotanicalapproaches. Our second aim is to highlight the potential of plants toprovide novel antiplasmodial compounds.We address this by using thefrontiersin.orgRichard-Bollans et al. 10.3389/fpls.2023.1173328collected data to estimate the number of active antiplasmodial speciesin the three families and we also explore methods for correctingexisting data biases, in order to infer a clearer picture ofantiplasmodial activity in Apocynaceae, Loganiaceae and Rubiaceae.1 https://www.wikipedia.org/ accessed on 14 Apr. 20222 Materials and methods2.1 Data collectionHere we use the term ‘trait’ in a broad sense that encompasses avariety of plant properties and characteristics. We collected a widerange of traits including morphological , biochemical ,environmental and geographic features, along with abstractfeatures relating to medicinal usage and common knowledge ofplant species. In the following, we provide detail of each of thecollected traits. A summary of the collected data and detail of thedata collection methods is given in the Supplementary Material.2.1.1 TaxonomyWe extracted accepted names of all species of the three familiesaccording to the World Checklist of Vascular Plants (WCVP) V7Frontiers in Plant Science 03(Govaerts et al., 2021), totalling 21,111 species – 6,495, 496 and14,120 from Apocynaceae, Loganiaceae and Rubiaceae respectively.We use Genus and Family names as categorical traits.2.1.2 Ethnobotanical dataDue to the documented link between traditional medicinalusage and bioactivity, evidenced in, for example, (Krettli, 2009),we collected binary traits documenting the presence and absence ofknown antimalarial usage (Antimalarial Use) and general medicinalusage (Medicinal). To compile these data we conducted acomprehensive literature review of medicinal usage in the threeplant families, along with data provided by the Medicinal PlantNames Services (MPNS, 2022) and references to medicinal usage onthe Plants of the World Online (POWO, 2022).As an extension of the ethnobotanical data, we included binarytraits to capture whether a plant is commonly known – which weapproximated by recording the presence of a Wikipedia1 page (WikiPage) and the existence of a common name (Common Name). Theexistence of Wikipedia pages for species is determined by searchingFIGURE 1Examples of active antiplasmodial compounds in Apocynaceae, Loganiaceae and Rubiaceae. (A) Aspidocarpine from species in the genus AspidospermaMart. & Zucc. (Apocynaceae). (B) Strychnogucine B found in species of the highly diversified genus, Strychnos L. (Loganiaceae). (C) Quinine, the well-knownantimalarial, found in the genus Cinchona L. (Rubiaceae). Photos by Cássia Bitencourt (A), Lucas Marinho (B) and Alexandre Antonelli (C).frontiersin.orgRichard-Bollans et al. 10.3389/fpls.2023.1173328all species, subspecies and varieties (and their synonyms). Commonname data are compiled from a variety of sources, outlined in theSupplementary Material, with the majority of the data coming fromMPNS and the United States Department of Agriculture PlantsDatabase (USDA, 2022b).2.1.3 PhytochemistryThere is much evidence of the pharmacological andpharmaceutical importance of plant-derived alkaloids (Cordellet al., 2001; Dey et al., 2020; Howes et al., 2020; Daley andCordell, 2021) and we have therefore collected binary traits ontheir presence/absence. These data were collected through acomprehensive literature review as well as metabolite datacompiled from KNApSAcK (Afendi et al., 2012).Though the coverage of the alkaloid data is relatively good (980species with reported presence or absence), for the vast majority(97%) of these species, reports indicate a presence of alkaloidscompared to 3% where alkaloids are absent. This may be the resultof reporting bias, where publications are focused on species foundto contain alkaloids and absences of alkaloids are not published. Toassess the prevalence of the reporting bias, we contacted 11 authorsof papers after the year 2000 that solely reported presences to ask ifthey had found any absences which they did not publish. Wereceived responses from three authors detailing three species wherealkaloids had been tested for and not found. Rather than being anissue of reporting bias, it may be the case that the vast majority ofspecies in these families produce alkaloids. There is some evidencefor this from studies testing large numbers of species for alkaloidswhere both presences and absences are reported e.g. (Soto-Sobeniset al., 2001). In either case, current data on the presence of alkaloidsare relatively uninformative and so is not included in the followinganalysis. Instead, we use the collected data on alkaloids to cataloguewhich species have been tested for alkaloids. We use these data tocreate a binary trait (Tested for Alkaloids) which we use to analysethe relationship between phytochemical knowledge and knowledgeof antiplasmodial activity.An important plant trait indicating potent bioactivity is thedegree to which a plant is toxic. As we aim to capture bioactivity in abroad sense, we compiled data on toxicity to any vertebrate andinvertebrate animals. We have included this as a binary trait(Poisonous). Poison data were compiled from numerous sourcesdetailing plants considered to be poisonous, outlined in theSupplementary Material, with the majority of the data comingfrom the LitTox resource (Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, 2021).2 https://www.gbif.org/what-is-gbif2.1.4 MorphologyAs a major putative role of certain phytochemicals is to protectplants from herbivores (Maldonado et al., 2017), it is plausible thatother defence mechanisms have a relation to bioactivity.Furthermore, certain biologically active compounds (e.g. somediterpene alkaloids) are biosynthesised in part icularmorphological structures (e.g. plant trichomes/hairs) of certainplants (Tomlinson et al., 2022). Here we assess the presence ofemergences (hairs or spines) which we include as a binary trait(Emergence). Emergence data have been collated by GentianalesFrontiers in Plant Science 04specialists, supplemented by the TRY plant trait database (Kattgeet al., 2020) and POWO.Another morphological trait we consider is plant life-form,which may correspond to occurrences of specific phytochemicals(de Almeida et al., 2005). To facilitate collection and coverage ofmorphological data, and as life-forms and presence of emergencesare often well conserved within genera in these families, we includethese traits by using the predominant state at the genus level. Asmultiple life-forms may appear within a single genus, the life-formdata are one-hot encoded giving a set of binary traits (herb, liana,succulent, shrub, subshrub, tree). Life form data were initiallyretrieved from the WCVP and Flora do Brasil (Jardim Botânicodo Rio de Janeiro, 2022), then reviewed and modified byGentianales specialists.2.1.5 Geographic regions with malariaTo examine the relationship between prevalence of malaria in agiven geographic area and the number of tested species, we collecteddata indicating which species are found in regions where malariatransmission occurs. We identified those regions from varioussources, including the World Health Organization Database(WHO, 2022a) and the World Bank Development Indicators(The World Bank, 2022) (see Supplementary Material for fulldetails). Regions indicated in these sources were then mappedonto the World Geographical Scheme for Recording PlantDistributions (Level 3) (Brummitt et al., 2001). We then used theWCVP distribution data to identify which species occur in thesemalarial regions (either native or introduced), assigned to eachspecies as a binary trait In Malarial Region.2.1.6 EnvironmentalThere is some evidence of environmental impacts on bioactivemetabolite concentrations and diversity, for example, (Defossezet al., 2021). To characterise the environmental niche of species,we followed the methodology of Zu et al. (2021). We first extractedgeographic occurrence records from the Global BiodiversityInformation Facility (GBIF)2 for each species using the rgbifpackage (Chamberlain et al., 2022) in R. Occurrence data fromGBIF contain many inconsistencies (Meyer et al., 2016). Initially wecleaned the data by removing: records collected before 1945, recordswith no given coordinates or impossible coordinates, records withcoordinate uncertainty over 20km, records with roundedcoordinates and records where the quantity of species occurrences(individual counts) is zero. Next, using the CoordinateCleanerpackage in R (Zizka et al., 2019) we removed: records with zerolongitude or latitude, records with equal longitude and latitude,records outside reported country, records within country orprovince centroids, records in country capitals, records withinstitutional coordinates and records with GBIF Head Quarterscoordinates. Finally, we discarded occurrences where species werereported to be outside of their native or introduced botanicalregions according to the WCVP.frontiersin.orgRichard-Bollans et al. 10.3389/fpls.2023.1173328We quantified species’ environmental conditions using a set of17 soil, climate, and topographic variables essential to plantsurvival, growth and reproduction. We extracted five soil traits(nitrogen content, pH, organic carbon stock (ocs), water capacity)from the SoilGrids database (Hengl et al., 2017; Poggio et al., 2021),which were averaged over a 30cm depth, as well as soil depth tobedrock. The eight bioclimatic traits we used were (bio1, bio4, bio10,bio11, bio12, bio15, bio16, bio17); representing temperature (meanannual, seasonality, daily mean of the warmest quarter, daily meanof the coldest quarter), precipitation (annual amount, seasonality,mean monthly amount of the wettest quarter, mean monthlyamount of the driest quarter). These were extracted from theCHELSA database V2.1 (Karger et al., 2017; Karger et al., 2021).We also extracted the Köppen-Geiger climate classification (kgmode) from GloH2O (Beck et al., 2018). Elevation and breaklineelevation were extracted from GMTED2010 (Danielson and Gesch,2011) and slope was calculated from the elevation data using theterra package in R (Hijmans, 2022).To match the resolution of the occurrence records, allenvironmental rasters were upscaled to 10 arc-minutes (c. 20 km)using the aggregate function of the terra package and environmentaltraits were extracted for each species occurrence using the extractfunction. For the continuous traits, median values were thencalculated across all occurrences of each species and for thecategorical variable kg mode the mode of all occurrences of eachspecies was used. To capture coarse spatial information we alsoincluded median latitude and longitude for each species, calculatedfrom the occurrence records.2.1.7 Classifying activityTo generate a comprehensive dataset of antiplasmodial activity,we conducted a thorough literature review for details ofantiplasmodial tests in Apocynaceae, Loganiaceae and Rubiaceaeand assigned activity labels to species based on the available reportsof in vitro and in vivo studies. As with many biological datasets(Bender and Cortes-Ciriano, 2021), providing class labels is anontrivial problem as there are many variations on theexperiments and methods used for reporting activity. A detailedsummary of the designated classification scheme we chose is givenin the Supplementary Material. In general, for in vitro studiestesting activity against Plasmodium parasites, the potency of IC50values for crude extracts follows the definitions given in(Rasoanaivo et al., 2004a) i.e. < 10mg/ml is active and ≥ 10mg/mlis inactive. For tests of isolated compounds, according to theMedicines for Malaria Venture3 compounds with IC50 values < 1µM are designated as active and of interest for further investigation,thus we use this threshold in our data. For fractions, we use athreshold of 5 mg/ml, which in general corresponds with publishedauthor decisions of activity categories. For in vivo studies, we use thepublished author decisions regarding activity.3 https://www.mmv.org/20th-call-proposals accessed on 30 Aug. 2022.Frontiers in Plant Science 052.1.8 (Pseudo)absencesFor some traits and datasets, presences are commonly reportedbut absences are not. For example, there are various datasets listingpoisonous plants but published data on ‘safe’ plants are sparse. Inmany cases, this is likely a result of reporting bias, however there aremultiple possible reasons for this. For certain traits there arepresence biases e.g. in the case of poisons, once a plant has beenfound to be poisonous it can be reported as such; however if a plantis assessed for its toxicity, there are various caveats which limit theability to confidently say the plant is safe. Examples of such caveatsinclude the effect of extraction or preparation method on toxicity,the specific plant part tested, and which organisms the plant is toxicto. These variables exist in addition to methodological differences inassessing toxicity and also that in vitro studies may not correlatewith effects in vivo (Houghton et al., 2007).Where missing data give a strong indication of a genuineabsence, i.e. for Common Name, Poisonous, Medicinal, Wiki Page,Antimalarial Use, Emergence, we take these pseudoabsences to beabsences and fill missing values with 0. Missing values for othertraits are left as NA and, where necessary, will be imputed.2.2 Analysing and correcting sampling biasAn obstacle to our analysis is the significant sampling bias in thedata. In part this has been created by the ethnobotanical approach todrug discovery. In this approach, researchers carry out (or rely on)ethnobotanical surveys that document traditional medicinal uses ofplants. Plants used traditionally for malaria are then investigated todetermine whether there is any scientific basis (e.g. antiplasmodialactivity) that could explain the traditional use. As a result, plantstraditionally used for malaria are significantly over-represented inthe data on antiplasmodial activity of plant species.In this section we outline the methods used to evidence theexistence of the sampling biases as well as a method we use forcorrecting sampling bias, which may allow for a better picture ofantiplasmodial activity and may be applied when training andevaluating machine learning models. Throughout this paper weuse labelled to indicate species which have been classified as Activeor Inactive following the scheme described in Section 2.1.7. We useunlabelled to indicate species with unknown antiplasmodial activity.The underlying population refers to all species in Apocynaceae,Loganiaceae and Rubiaceae.Firstly, we compare the labelled data with the underlyingpopulation by highlighting common choices made by researcherswhen selecting plants to test for antiplasmodial activity. We thenstatistically verify the differences using the Chi-squared test(Pearson, 1900) for the discrete traits and the Kolmogorov–Smirnov 2-Sample test (Smirnov, 1939) for the continuous traits.In order to account for the repetition of multiple tests and theassociated family-wise error rate, we adjust the significancethresholds using the Holm-Bonferroni method (Holm, 1979).Before describing the bias correction method we haveimplemented, we first outline our assumptions about the natureof the bias. Let s be a binary variable denoting the sampling decisionfrontiersin.orgRichard-Bollans et al. 10.3389/fpls.2023.1173328i.e. 1 indicates a sample is in the labelled data and 0 indicates asample is unlabelled. Given a species with traits x and activity labely, we assume that the sampling decision, P(sjx, y), is independent ofy given x, P(sjx, y) = P(sjx) i.e. plants are tested without a prioriknowledge of their activity, y, but based on traits, x, that mightincrease the probability of active compounds compared to randomsampling. This is commonly known as the missing at random(MAR) assumption (Zadrozny, 2004).As described by Cortes et al. (2008), we can correct for samplingbias by reweighting the sampled (labelled) data using the inverse ofthe sampling probability for each sample, 1=P(sjx)4, a techniqueoften referred to as Inverse Probability Weighting. Under thisprocedure, the reweighted data will resemble the underlyingpopulation if P(sjx) is accurately estimated. As an example in thecontext of the current study, species which are traditionally used formalaria have a relatively high probability of being tested and as aresult are over-represented in the available sample i.e. P(sjx) is largefor these species and so the assigned weight is small.To predict P(sjx), we use a regularised Logistic Regressionmodel, implemented in the scikit-learn Python library (Pedregosaet al., 2011) which we refer to as the Correction Model. We use sucha model to limit overfitting and as Logistic Regression models aregenerally well calibrated. Given a sample (labelled) dataset andunderlying population, instances in the sample dataset are labelleds = 1 and instances not in the sample are labelled s = 0. TheCorrection Model is trained to predict s from the given traits suchthat, assuming good calibration, the probability estimates given bythe model correspond to P(sjx).Prior to training the model, the categorical traits Genus, Familyand kg mode are target encoded in the preprocessing step using thecategory_encoders library (Micci-Barreca, 2001). The traits are thenscaled by removing the mean and scaling to unit variance. Finally,we use the scikit-learn (Pedregosa et al., 2011) k-Nearest Neighborimputer to impute any missing values. Missing values of a trait froma given sample are imputed by assigning the mean trait value of thefive samples nearest to the given sample, where nearness betweentwo samples is measured with the Euclidean distance using the traitsthat neither sample is missing.To verify the accuracy of this bias correction approach, wecalculated the mean Brier score (Brier, 1950) of the predictedprobabilities in 10 iterations of 10-fold stratified cross validation.The Brier Score measures the difference between the predictedprobability given by the model and the actual label (s = 0 or 1). Wealso visualise the accuracy of the bias correction approach bycomparing the means of the traits in the labelled data, underlyingpopulation and the bias-corrected labelled data.2.3 Machine learning modelsTo explore the success of different plant selection approachesand motivate a machine learning based approach to the problem,we train Support Vector (SVC), Logistic Regression (Logit)4 The constant P (s = 1) is omitted.Frontiers in Plant Science 06(Pedregosa et al., 2011), XGBoost (XGB) (Chen and Guestrin,2016) and Bayesian Neural Network (BNN) (Silvestro andAndermann, 2020) classifiers and compare these with twoethnobotanical approaches: selection based on traditionalantimalarial use and selection based on traditional medicinal usenot specific for malaria.As the cost of false positives is relatively high – resources will bemisallocated in trying to find antiplasmodial compounds in inactivespecies – we aim to maximise precision of the models i.e. theproportion of species which are predicted to be active that arecorrectly predicted. Of course, recall (the proportion of activespecies predicted to be active) is still important as a large list ofantiplasmodial species provides more opportunities for finding newantiplasmodial compounds. However, even with very low recall themodels will still generate very large lists of antiplasmodial speciesfrom the 21,111 species in Apocynaceae, Loganiaceae andRubiaceae. As a result, we aim to maximise the F-score with b =0.5 (F0.5), i.e. the harmonic mean of precision and recall with moreimportance given to precision. We evaluate the models with thisscore along with precision, and also provide precision-recall curves.We evaluate the models using 10 iterations of 10-fold stratifiedcross validation in two settings. Firstly, we analyse modelperformance in the usual case, where the models are trained andtested on folds of the given data. We also attempt to estimate modelperformance on the underlying population by assigning sampleweights to the labelled data, using the method discussed in Section2.2, such that the given labelled data is more representative of theunderlying population. In this case, sample weights are used in bothtraining and testing.2.3.1 PreprocessingIn the preprocessing step, the categorical traits Genus, Familyand kg mode are target encoded. The traits are then scaled byremoving the mean and scaling to unit variance. We then use thescikit-learn (Pedregosa et al., 2011) k-Nearest Neighbor imputer,trained using the training data and the unlabelled data, to imputeany missing values. Finally, we use Principal Component Analysis(PCA), implemented in scikit-learn, to reduce the dimensionality ofthe highly colinear continuous environmental traits. The PCA istrained using the training data and unlabelled data and the numberof components used in the PCA is selected such that at least 80% ofthe variance is explained by the components. The traits In MalarialRegion and Tested for Alkaloids were collected for the analysis ofsampling bias rather than as predictive traits and so are not includedin the machine learning models.2.3.2 TrainingThe Logit, SVC and XGB classifiers are trained as follows. Given aset of training folds and a test fold, hyperparameters of the models aretuned via cross validation on the training data using GridSearchCV(Pedregosa et al., 2011). In this step, F0.5 is used as the evaluationmetricand we tune a basic list of hyperparameters in order tominimise under/overfitting and to maximise F0.5. For the Logit and SVC classifiers, wetune the regularisation parameter C, as well as the class_weightparameter. For the XGB classifier, we tune the max_depthfrontiersin.orgRichard-Bollans et al. 10.3389/fpls.2023.1173328parameter. Once the best hyperparameters for the models have beengenerated the models are retrained on all the given training data (with/without sample weights depending on the evaluation setting).For the BNN classifier, we use two layers of 10 and 5 nodes,respectively, and tanh activation function. We train the model through100,000 Markov chain Monte Carlo iterations, as implemented innpBNN (Silvestro and Andermann, 2020), with/without sampleweights depending on the evaluation setting. We use 1,000 posteriorsamples of the parameters when generating predictions.2.4 Assessing activity in the study familiesIn order to motivate further exploration of these three plantfamilies as potential sources of new pharmaceuticals, we use thecollected data to estimate the antiplasmodial activity of the familiesin two ways. Firstly, we summarise the proportion of active speciesin each family using the collected labelled data. As this is likely to beunrepresentative due to the sampling biases, we also provide asummary of the labelled data when the bias is corrected using themethod discussed in Section 2.2.We also use the estimation of P(sjx), discussed in Section 2.2, toanalyse the existing sampling decision and highlight the wealth ofpotentially active species that are currently overlooked. First, wecompare P(sjx) for the known active and inactive species in thelabelled data. We then analyse species that are highly unlikely to betested according to the existing sampling decision and we take theseto be species for which P(sjx) is below the median value in theunlabelled data. We check the known activity of these species anduse the machine learning model with the highest precision toprovide a conservative estimate of how many of these species areactive in the underlying population. The estimate of the number ofactive species given by the model is corrected using an estimate ofthe model precision. The model precision estimate is generatedfrom the mean precision given in the cross-validation evaluationand we calculate a 95% bootstrap confidence interval from theprecision scores given in each fold of the cross-validation.3 Results3.1 Data summary3.1.1 Labelled dataFollowing the scheme for classifying activity described inSection 2.1.7, we designated 132 species as active and 150 speciesas inactive, providing 282 labelled species from the 21,111 species inApocynaceae, Loganiaceae and Rubiaceae. In these labelled data, allspecies are given trait values for each of the traits except for thosetrait values which rely on GBIF occurrence records where data aremissing for five species.3.1.2 Trait relationsFigure 2 provides a brief overview of the collected data,summarising relationships between some of the traits from all thecollected data. The heatmap gives a visualisation of the co-occurrencesFrontiers in Plant Science 07of the binary traits, and the given values correspond to the meanvalues of traits in the y axis when traits in the x axis are present, while‘All Species’ provides a comparison with mean values of traits in theunderlying population. For example, 1% of all species are usedtraditionally for malaria while 18% of poisonous species are usedtraditionally for malaria. Similarly 10% of all species are used astraditional medicines while 77% of poisonous species are used asmedicines. With regards to activity, the first column provides meantrait values for active species which indicate stark differences with theunderlying population (e.g. 52% of active species are poisonouscompared to 3% in the underlying population). However, thesedifferences are more a reflection of the sampling biases rather thanany strong relationships between the traits and antiplasmodial activity.3.2 Sampling bias3.2.1 Comparing the labelled data with theunderlying populationThe most common feature motivating the selection of plants totest for antiplasmodial activity is traditional knowledge of use formalaria, for example (Andrade-Neto et al., 2003; Bourdy et al., 2004;Bertania et al., 2005; Ramalhete et al., 2008; Ezike et al., 2016; Taeket al., 2021). We found that 48% of labelled species are traditionallyused for malaria while only 1% of species in the underlyingpopulation are traditionally used for malaria. Similarly, plants arefrequently tested based on more general traditional medicinal usage(not specific to malaria), e.g. (Kaushik et al., 2013; Mothana et al.,2014; Singh et al., 2015; Satish et al., 2017). 77% of labelled speciesare traditionally used as medicines while 10% of species in theunderlying population are traditionally used as medicines.As previous successes in finding plants with antiplasmodialactivity have linked their alkaloid content to the antiplasmodialactivity, tests of antiplasmodial activity are often conducted onplants known/expected to contain alkaloids. For example (Wrightet al., 1992; Solis et al., 1995; Likhitwitayawuid et al., 1999; Wenigeret al., 2001; Mitaine-Offer et al., 2002; Federici et al., 2009).Moreover, in many reports where plants are tested forantiplasmodial activity, those studies also include tests for (andfind) alkaloids e.g. (Likhitwitayawuid et al., 1999; Muhammad et al.,2003; Suksamrarn et al., 2003; Wong et al., 2011). As a result, 69% oflabelled species and 82% of active species have been tested forpresence of alkaloids, while only 5% of species in the underlyingpopulation have been tested for presence of alkaloids.Another potential factor influencing sampling is the geographiclocation of species, i.e. plants occurring in regions with malaria arecommonly selected to test for antiplasmodial activity, for example(Rasoanaivo et al., 2004b; Bertania et al., 2005; Al-Musayeib et al.,2012; Kantamreddi and Wright, 2012; Taek et al., 2021). As a result,99% of labelled species are found in malarial regions compared to89% in the underlying population. In fact, there is only one testedspecies which is not found in a malarial region (Gardenia urvilleiMontrouz. (Rubiaceae) which is native to New Caledonia) and threeOchrosia Juss. (Apocynaceae) species (native to Fiji, Tonga and NewCaledonia) whose activity is known through the presence ofantiplasmodial compounds (not themselves explicitly tested)which are not found in malarial regions.frontiersin.orgRichard-Bollans et al. 10.3389/fpls.2023.1173328It is also common to test plants taxonomically related to knownantiplasmodial plants (Weenen et al., 1990; Frédérich et al., 2002;Philippe et al., 2005; dos Santos Torres et al., 2013; Brandão et al.,2020). For example, some genera known to contain active speciesare frequently tested e.g. Aspidosperma (Apocynaceae: Gentianales)(18 labelled species) and Strychnos (Loganiaceae: Gentianales) (36labelled species).For almost all the quantitative traits, the difference between thelabelled data and underlying population (as measured by Chi-squaredtest for the discrete traits and the Kolmogorov–Smirnov 2-Sample testfor the continuous traits) is significant (corrected p values < 0.05) withthe exception of life-forms (lianas and succulents). The most divergingtraits are Antimalarial Use and Tested for Alkaloids (corrected p values= 0, Chi-squared statistic 3137 and 2218 respectively). We cantherefore conclude that the labelled data significantly differ from theunderlying population. Overall, it is apparent that the approaches usedto select plants for antiplasmodial tests have biased the available data onantiplasmodial activity.3.2.2 Bias correctionWhen testing the Correction Model in 10 iterations of 10-foldstratified cross validation, the mean Brier score was 0.0097 (SD =0.001), indicating an accurate fit to the data and so, a reliableprediction of the selection probability. A visual comparison of thebias-corrected data and the underlying population is given inFigures 3, 4. For readability, the mean values of the continuoustraits are rescaled between 0 and 1 using the MinMaxScaler fromscikit-learn (Pedregosa et al., 2011). We can see that for the majorityof the traits, the mean values of the corrected data closely resemblethe underlying population compared to the values in the labelled data.3.3 Comparing plant selection approachesGiven the quantification of antiplasmodial activity, we may nowanalyse the effectiveness of different approaches for plant selection –Frontiers in Plant Science 08random selection, selection based on traditional antimalarial use(Ethno (M)) and selection based on general traditional medicinaluse not specific for malaria (Ethno (G)). Table 1 provides asummary of the precisions of these methods on the biased andcorrected datasets. When plants are selected based on a history ofuse for malaria or general medicinal usage, they are more likely tobe active than selecting plants at random (both in the biased andcorrected cases). This result provides some validation for theethnopharmacological approach and agrees with the findings of(Krettli et al., 2001). However, in Apocynaceae, Loganiaceae andRubiaceae, only 281 species have a history of antimalarial usage and2109 have a history of general medicinal usage which limits thesearch for new compounds to a relatively small group of plants.Considering the sampling decision more generally, in theuncorrected case, the value for the ‘Random’ approach reflects themean activity of all tested species and provides some quantification ofthe overall precision of the existing plant selection approach i.e.species selected for testing by researchers have a probability of beingactive of 0.47, while the estimate of the mean activity of theFIGURE 2Co-occurrence heatmap summarising collected binary traits.FIGURE 3Mean values of binary traits in biased and corrected datasets.FIGURE 4Scaled mean values of continuous traits in biased and correcteddatasets.frontiersin.orgRichard-Bollans et al. 10.3389/fpls.2023.1173328underlying population is 0.36. Similarly, the mean value of P(sjx, y)for active species in the labelled dataset is 0.53, while for inactivespecies this value is 0.31.3.3.1 Machine learning evaluation3.3.1.1 Without bias correctionIn Figure 5, we see the performance of the machine learningmodels compared to the two ethnobotanical approaches. Overallthe mean scores of the machine learning models improve on bothapproaches and indicate that antiplasmodial activity can bepredicted relatively accurately from the collected traits (meanprecisions – BNN: 0.66, XGB: 0.66, Logit: 0.62, SVC: 0.65, Ethno(M): 0.57, Ethno (G): 0.50). The Precision-Recall curves in Figure 6,generated using all test instances in the cross validation, show howvarying the classifier thresholds can improve precision at the cost ofrecall, for example, by increasing the threshold of the models we canachieve a precision of over 0.8 with a recall of approximately 0.2.3.3.1.2 Corrected performanceFigures 7, 8 show the estimated performance of the models onthe underlying population. Again, though there is higher variance inmodel performance due to the weights used on the train and testsamples, the machine learning models improve on theethnobotanical approaches. Moreover, above we estimated thatthe precision of the existing plant selection approach of the fieldas a whole was 0.47, and our models again compare well with this(mean precisions – BNN: 0.59, XGB: 0.63, Logit: 0.66, SVC: 0.67).Frontiers in Plant Science 093.4 Antiplasmodial potential ofApocynaceae, Loganiaceae and RubiaceaeIn Table 2, we provide a summary of the proportion of activespecies in each family. The given labelled data suggest a high level ofactivity in the families (47%), though when we estimate the activityof the underlying population by correcting for the sampling biases,the proportion is lower (36%). Nevertheless, this estimate indicatesthat there are approximately 7677 species in these families that maywarrant further investigation.3.4.1 SurprisesFor those species that we deem highly unlikely to be tested,(P(sjx) < 0:0014) only 2 such species are in the labelled data whereone is known to be active, while 9997 are in the unlabelled data.When the SVC model is trained on all the available data and used topredict the activity of these species in the unlabelled data, 2358 areestimated to be active. This gives a 95% confidence interval of 1300– 1522 active species when the model precision is accounted for.Note that this is a conservative approximation as we are onlyconsidering species that the model predicts to be active andcorrecting for the estimated false positives. However, as visible inthe Precision-Recall curves, recall of the models is not perfect and itis highly likely that there are also a significant number of speciesthat the model predicts to be inactive species which are infact active.4 DiscussionIn this study we have shown that machine learning modelsbased on plant traits can be effective at selecting activeantiplasmodial plants. Moreover, as the machine learning modelsoutput a classification confidence for each sample, researcherssearching for active species may select samples which are labelledas active with most confidence by the models. The Precision-RecallTABLE 1 Precision of selection strategies.Uncorrected CorrectedRandom 0.47 0.36Ethno (G) 0.50 0.42Ethno (M) 0.56 0.42FIGURE 5Model performance in stratified cross validation without bias correction.frontiersin.orgRichard-Bollans et al. 10.3389/fpls.2023.1173328curves in Section 3.3.1 indicate that such an approach could yield alarge number of active species with a precision of at least 0.8.We have also extensively considered sampling biases in the data,an issue that exists in botany (Meyer et al., 2016; Visscher et al.,2022) and biological sciences more generally (Bender and Cortes-Ciriano, 2021). We have used a bias correction method to provide amore accurate representation of the properties of the underlyingdata and a more robust evaluation of plant selection methods. Wehope that by tackling sampling bias in our particular context weraise awareness of this issue in botany more widely and highlightpotential solutions to this problem.Our results suggest that there are a large number of species(approximately 7677) in Apocynaceae, Loganiaceae and Rubiaceaewith antiplasmodial potential while only 281 species have a historyof antimalarial usage. Furthermore, of those species we deem highlyunlikely to be investigated, we estimate at least 1300 untested species toFrontiers in Plant Science 10be active. These results indicate a vast and relatively untapped source toaccelerate the search for new plant-derived antiplasmodial compounds.We have so far explored the potential of machine learning inpredicting antiplasmodial activity. However, activity is not the onlymetric to evaluate useful medicinal plants. For example, useful activecompounds found in plants will ideally also be more selective forPlasmodium parasites and less toxic to human cells. Plants usedtraditionally as oral preparations, which have a long history of use,may give some indication of their safety and/or possible selectivity,which is a potential benefit of selecting traditionally used plants.Moreover, our machine learning approach does not yet provide anyindication of which plant parts contain the active compounds, andwhich extraction methods optimise their concentrations; in contrast totraditional preparations that specify plant parts and methods for theirpreparation. Nevertheless, finding active antiplasmodial plants is still acritical step in the search for new antiplasmodial plant-derivedcompounds with potential lead structures/pharmacophores tofacilitate future drug discovery for malaria. The urgent need to findnew antimalarial drugs exists against a backdrop of escalating resistanceto existing antimalarial drugs (Uwimana et al., 2020), and in thecontext that the WHO’s Global Technical Strategy for Malaria (2016 –2030) aims to ensure universal access to malaria prevention, diagnosisand treatment, an aim that is supported through harnessing innovationand expanding research (WHO, 2017).In summary, we show that trait data-based machine learningmodels can outperform existing ethnobotanical plant selectionapproaches to find species with antiplasmodial activity, andprovide a novel approach underpinning future work to predictthe bioactivity of plant species. Plants are a known source of leadcompounds for pharmaceutical drug development (Howes et al.,2020; Newman and Cragg, 2020) and more strategic and efficientapproaches are needed to facilitate future drug discovery,particularly considering that there are an estimated 343,000known vascular plant species (Govaerts et al., 2021) that remainlargely unexplored scientifically. This study highlights the potentialFIGURE 6Precision-Recall Curves in stratified cross validation without biascorrection.FIGURE 7Model performance in stratified cross validation with bias correction of training and testing samples.frontiersin.orgRichard-Bollans et al. 10.3389/fpls.2023.1173328of integrating ethnobotanical knowledge with technologicaladvances. While such integration creates promising opportunities,we stress the need that any material and non-material benefits areshared fairly and equitably with knowledge holders and stewards ofplant diversity around the world (Antonelli, 2023). By exploringsustainable uses of biodiversity, societies are more likely to reach theambitious goals and targets set under the recently establishedKunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework.4.1 Related work and noveltyIn this paper we have presented and evaluated a novel approachbased on plant traits to predict the antiplasmodial activity of plants.Though there is some related work, e.g. predicting antiplasmodialactivity of compounds (Egieyeh et al., 2018; Danishuddin et al.,2019; Bosc et al., 2021), predicting potential antiplasmodial plantsusing traditional antimalarial usage as a proxy (Pellicer et al., 2018;Milliken et al., 2021), predicting other related measures ofbioactivity (Rønsted et al., 2012; Maldonado et al., 2017;Holzmeyer et al., 2020); we believe ours is the first to predictantiplasmodial activity of plants directly based on a combination ofplant trait data.In order to predict the antiplasmodial activity of plants, we havegenerated a comprehensive resource of plant traits and documentedantiplasmodial activity for plants in the Apocynaceae, LoganiaceaeFrontiers in Plant Science 11and Rubiaceae families. With regards to antiplasmodial activity, theclosest available datasets we were able to find detailingantiplasmodial plants were the metabolite and biological activitydata from KNApSAcK (Afendi et al., 2012) and Dr. Duke’sPhytochemical and Ethnobotanical Databases (DPED) (USDA,2022a). In an attempt to utilise the KNApSAcK data, weextracted information on known antiplasmodial metabolites fromKNApSAcK and using the KNApSAcK database, were able tomatch these to plants which contain these compounds. Similarly,we downloaded the list of antiplasmodial plants in DPED andfiltered the results to the study families. We found these data to belimited. Firstly, in both cases, the data are limited to antiplasmodialactivity of specific compounds rather than antiplasmodial fractionsor extracts from plants. Secondly, the coverage of the data is poor(from KNApSAcK: one active species in Apocynaceae, one inLoganiaceae and four in Rubiaceae; from DPED: 19 active speciesin Apocynaceae, one in Loganiaceae and ten in Rubiaceae). Also,though KNApSAcK and DPED provide references to the originalresearch, it is not clear exactly what criteria are used to determinewhen a compound is an active antiplasmodial and in DPED manyof the cases of ‘active’ species were due to presence of compoundswith weak activity (e.g. lupeol, rutin, quercetin and betulinic acid).Finally, from these kind of data, it is difficult to ascertain withconfidence which plants are inactive.4.2 Future workWe have shown that the collected trait data can be used to predictantiplasmodial activity with machine learning approaches and basicpreprocessing steps. However, though we have used a bias correctionmethod to improve evaluation of the plant selection approaches, werecognise that the models must be tested on the underlying populationin order to obtain a true measure of model performance. We hope toaddress this in future work by using the machine learning models topredict active species in the underlying population and assessing theactivity of these predicted species in new antiplasmodial assays.Regarding training of the models, as we have seen, theantiplasmodial activity is known for only 282 species, resulting in arelatively small dataset for training machine learning models. Webelieve that small improvements in the existing data could furtherimprove performance of the machine learning approaches, and, wherepossible, we therefore encourage further testing of species that arecurrently underrepresented in the existing data.FIGURE 8Precision-Recall Curves in stratified cross validation with biascorrection of training and testing samples.TABLE 2 Estimated proportions of active species.Uncorrected CorrectedApocynaceae 0.57 0.51Loganiaceae 0.30 0.12Rubiaceae 0.41 0.34All 0.47 0.36frontiersin.orgRichard-Bollans et al. 10.3389/fpls.2023.1173328Data availability statementThe original contributions presented in the study areincluded in the article/Supplementary Material. All finalisedtrait data and analysis are archived in https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7836732. Further inquiries can be directed to thecorresponding author.Author contributionsM-JRH, OP-E, EL, JR and AA conceptualized the study. AR-B,CB, DG, EL, M-JRH, CA, DR, IO and SP collated data and providedspecialist input on datasets. DS provided specialist input on themachine learning methodology. CW provided specialist input onantiplasmodial activity. AR-B collated data, conducted analyses anddrafted the original manuscript. All authors participated in writingand giving feedback on the manuscript. All authors have read andapproved the final manuscript.FundingThe authors would like to thank the individuals who havegenerously funded this project. DS received funding from the SwissNational Science Foundation (PCEFP3_187012) and the SwedishResearch Council (VR: 2019-04739). DS and AA acknowledgefunding from the Swedish Foundat ion for Strateg icEnvironmental Research MISTRA within the framework of theresearch programme BIOPATH (F 2022/1448). AA furtheracknowledges financial support from the Swedish ResearchCouncil (2019-05191) and the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew.Frontiers in Plant Science 12AcknowledgmentsThe authors thank Dr. Bob Allkin and the MPNS team for useof necessary datasets from RBG Kew (MPNS, 2022) and Dr.Elizabeth Dauncey for useful discussions on poisonous plant dataand access to the LitTox resource (Royal Botanic Gardens,Kew, 2021).Conflict of interestThe authors declare that the research was conducted in theabsence of any commercial or financial relationships that could beconstrued as a potential conflict of interest.Publisher’s noteAll claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authorsand do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations,or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any productthat may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by itsmanufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.Supplementary materialThe Supplementary Material for this article can be found onlineat: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpls.2023.1173328/full#supplementary-materialReferencesAfendi, F. M., Okada, T., Yamazaki, M., Hirai-Morita, A., Nakamura, Y., Nakamura,K., et al. (2012). KNApSAcK family databases: integrated metabolite–plant speciesdatabases for multifaceted plant research. Plant Cell Physiol. 53, e1–e1. doi: 10.1093/pcp/pcr165Al-Musayeib, N. M., Mothana, R. A., Al-Massarani, S., Matheeussen, A., Cos, P., andMaes, L. (2012). Study of the in vitro antiplasmodial, antileishmanial andantitrypanosomal activities of medicinal plants from Saudi Arabia. Molecules 17,11379–11390. doi: 10.3390/molecules171011379Andrade-Neto, V., Brandão, M., Stehmann, J., Oliveira, L., and Krettli, A. (2003).Antimalarial activity of cinchona-like plants used to treat fever and malaria in Brazil. J.Ethnopharmacology 87, 253–256. doi: 10.1016/S0378-8741(03)00141-7Antonelli, A. (2023). Indigenous knowledge is key to sustainable food systems.Nature 613, 239–242. doi: 10.1038/d41586-023-00021-4Beck, H. E., Zimmermann, N. E., McVicar, T. R., Vergopolan, N., Berg, A., andWood, E. F. (2018). Present and future köppen-Geiger climate classification maps at 1-km resolution. Sci. Data 5, 1–12. doi: 10.1038/sdata.2018.214Bender, A., and Cortes-Ciriano, I. (2021). Artificial intelligence in drug discovery:what is realistic, what are illusions? part 2: a discussion of chemical and biological data.Drug Discov. Today 26, 1040–1052. doi: 10.1016/j.drudis.2020.11.037Bertania, S., Bourdyb, G., Landaua, I., Robinsonc, J., Esterred, P., and Deharo, E.(2005). Evaluation of French Guiana traditional antimalarial remedies. J.Ethnopharmacology 98, 45–54. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2004.12.020Bosc, N., Felix, E., Arcila, R., Mendez, D., Saunders, M. R., Green, D. V. S., et al.(2021). MAIP: a web service for predicting blood-stage malaria inhibitors. J.Cheminformatics 13, 13. doi: 10.1186/s13321-021-00487-2Bourdy, G., Oporto, P., Gimenez, A., and Deharo, E. (2004). A search for naturalbioactive compounds in Bolivia through a multidisciplinary approach. J.Ethnopharmacology 93, 269–277. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2004.03.045Brandão, D. L., d., N., Martins, M. T., Silva, A. O., Almeida, A. D., d., R. C., et al.(2020). Anti-malarial activity and toxicity of aspidosperma nitidum benth: a plant usedin traditional medicine in the Brazilian Amazon. Research Soc. Dev. 9, e5059108817.doi: 10.33448/rsd-v9i10.8817Brier, G. W. (1950). Verification of forecasts expressed in terms of probability.Monthly weather Rev. 78, 1–3.Brummitt, R. K., Pando, F., Hollis, S., and Brummitt, N. (2001). World geographicalscheme for recording plant distributions Vol. 951 (Hunt Institute for BotanicalDocumentation, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh: International workinggroup on taxonomic databases for plant sciences (TDWG)).Chamberlain, S., Barve, V., Mcglinn, D., Oldoni, D., Desmet, P., Geffert, L., et al.(2022). Rgbif: interface to the global biodiversity information facility API.Chen, T., and Guestrin, C. (2016). “XGBoost: a scalable tree boosting system,” inProceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on KnowledgeDiscovery and Data Mining (New York, NY, USA: Association for ComputingMachinery), 785–794. doi: 10.1145/2939672.2939785Cordell, G. A., Quinn-Beattie, M. L., and Farnsworth, N. R. (2001). The potential ofalkaloids in drug discovery. Phytotherapy Res. 15, 183–205. doi: 10.1002/ptr.890Cortes, C., Mohri, M., Riley, M., and Rostamizadeh, A. (2008). “Sample selection biascorrection theory,” in Algorithmic learning theory, vol. 5254. (Berlin, Heidelberg:Springer Berlin Heidelberg), 38–53. doi: 10.1007/978-3-540-87987-9frontiersin.orgRichard-Bollans et al. 10.3389/fpls.2023.1173328Daley, S.-k., and Cordell, G. A. (2021). Alkaloids in contemporary drug discovery tomeet global disease needs. Molecules 26, 3800. doi: 10.3390/molecules26133800Danielson, J. J., and Gesch, D. B. (2011). Global multi-resolution terrain elevationdata 2010 (GMTED2010): U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 2011–1073, 26 p.Danishuddin,, Madhukar, G., Malik, M. Z., and Subbarao, N. (2019). Development andrigorous validation of antimalarial predictive models using machine learning approaches.SAR QSAR Environ. Res. 30, 543–560. doi: 10.1080/1062936X.2019.1635526de Almeida, C., de Lima e Silva, T., de Amorim, E., Maia, M., d., S., and deAlbuquerque, U. (2005). Life strategy and chemical composition as predictors of theselection of medicinal plants from the caatinga (Northeast Brazil). J. Arid Environments62, 127–142. doi: 10.1016/j.jaridenv.2004.09.020Defossez, E., Pitteloud, C., Descombes, P., Glauser, G., Allard, P.-M., Walker, T. W.N., et al. (2021). Spatial and evolutionary predictability of phytochemical diversity.Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 118, e2013344118. doi: 10.1073/pnas.2013344118Dey, P., Kundu, A., Kumar, A., Gupta, M., Lee, B. M., Bhakta, T., et al. (2020).“Analysis of alkaloids (indole alkaloids, isoquinoline alkaloids, tropane alkaloids),” inRecent advances in natural products analysis (Elsevier), 505–567. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-816455-6.00015-9dos Santos Torres, Z., Silveira, E., Rocha e Silva, L., Lima, E., de Vasconcellos, M., deAndrade Uchoa, D., et al. (2013). Chemical composition of aspidosperma ulei markgr.and antiplasmodial activity of selected indole alkaloids. Molecules 18, 6281–6297.doi: 10.3390/molecules18066281Egieyeh, S., Syce, J., Malan, S. F., and Christoffels, A. (2018). Predictive classifiermodels built from natural products with antimalarial bioactivity using machinelearning approach. PloS One 13, 1–15. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0204644Ezike, A. C., Okonkwo, C. H., Akah, P. A., Okoye, T. C., Nworu, C. S., Mbaoji, F. N.,et al. (2016). Landolphia owariensis leaf extracts reduce parasitemia in Plasmodiumberghe i - infected mice . Pharm. Bio l . 54, 2017–2025. doi : 10 .3109/13880209.2016.1138970Federici, E., Palazzino, G., Nicoletti, M., and Galeffi, C. (2009). Antiplasmodialactivity of the alkaloids of Peschiera fuchsiaefolia. Planta Med. 66, 93–95. doi: 10.1055/s-0029-1243122Frédérich, M., Jacquier, M.-J., Thépenier, P., De Mol, P., Tits, M., Philippe, G., et al.(2002). Antiplasmodial activity of alkaloids from various Strychnos species. J. NaturalProducts 65, 1381–1386. doi: 10.1021/np020070eGovaerts, R., Nic Lughadha, E., Black, N., Turner, R., and Paton, A. (2021). Theworld checklist of vascular plants, a continuously updated resource for exploring globalplant diversity. Sci. Data 8, 1–10. doi: 10.1038/s41597-021-00997-6Hengl, T., Mendes de Jesus, J., Heuvelink, G. B., Ruiperez Gonzalez, M., Kilibarda,M., Blagotić, A., et al. (2017). SoilGrids250m: global gridded soil information based onmachine learning. PloS One 12, e0169748. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0169748Hijmans, R. J. (2022). Terra: spatial data analysis.Holm, S. (1979). A simple sequentially rejective multiple test procedure.Scandinavian J. Stat 6, 65–70.Holzmeyer, L., Hartig, A.-K., Franke, K., Brandt, W., Muellner-Riehl, A. N.,Wessjohann, L. A., et al. (2020). Evaluation of plant sources for antiinfective leadcompound discovery by correlating phylogenetic, spatial, and bioactivity data. Proc.Natl. Acad. Sci. 117, 12444–12451. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1915277117Houghton, P., Howes, M.-J. R., Lee, C., and Steventon, G. (2007). Uses and abuses ofin vitro tests in ethnopharmacology: visualizing an elephant. J. Ethnopharmacology 110,391–400. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2007.01.032Howes, M.-J. R., Quave, C. L., Collemare, J., Tatsis, E. C., Twilley, D., Lulekal, E.,et al. (2020). Molecules from nature: reconciling biodiversity conservation and globalhealthcare imperatives for sustainable use of medicinal plants and fungi. Plants PeoplePlanet 2, 463–481. doi: 10.1002/ppp3.10138Jardim Botânico do Rio de Janeiro (2022) Flora do brasil. Available at: http://floradobrasil.jbrj.gov.br/.Kantamreddi, V. S. S., and Wright, C. W. (2012). Screening Indian plant species forantiplasmodial properties - ethnopharmacological compared with random selection.Phytotherapy Res. 26, 1793–1799. doi: 10.1002/ptr.4651Karger, D. N., Conrad, O., Böhner, J., Kawohl, T., Kreft, H., Soria-Auza, R. W., et al.(2017). Climatologies at high resolution for the earth’s land surface areas. Sci. Data 4,170122. doi: 10.1038/sdata.2017.122Karger, D. N., Conrad, O., Böhner, J., Kawohl, T., Kreft, H., Soria-Auza, R. W., et al.(2021). Climatologies at high resolution for the earth’s land surface areas. EnviDat.doi: 10.16904/envidat.228.v2.1Kattge, J., Bönisch, G., Dıáz, S., Lavorel, S., Prentice, I. C., Leadley, P., et al. (2020).TRY plant trait database–enhanced coverage and open access. Global Change Biol. 26,119–188. doi: 10.1111/gcb.14904Kaushik, N. K., Bagavan, A., Rahuman, A. A., Mohanakrishnan, D., Kamaraj, C., Elango,G., et al. (2013). Antiplasmodial potential of selected medicinal plants from Eastern ghats ofsouth India. Exp. Parasitol. 134, 26–32. doi: 10.1016/j.exppara.2013.01.021Krettli, A. U. (2009). Antimalarial drug discovery: screening of Brazilian medicinalplants and purified compounds. Expert Opin. Drug Discovery 4, 95–108. doi: 10.1517/17530050802678127Krettli, A. U., Andrade-Neto, V. F., Brandão, M., d., G. L., and Ferrari, W. M. (2001).The search for new antimalarial drugs from plants used to treat fever and malaria orFrontiers in Plant Science 13plants ramdomly selected: a review. Memórias do Instituto Oswaldo Cruz 96, 1033–1042. doi: 10.1590/S0074-02762001000800002Likhitwitayawuid, K., Dej-adisai, S., Jongbunprasert, V., and Krungkrai, J. (1999).Antimalarials from stephania venosa, prismatomeris sessiliflora, diospyros montanaand murraya siamensis. Planta Med. 65, 754–756. doi: 10.1055/s-2006-960858Maldonado, C., Barnes, C. J., Cornett, C., Holmfred, E., Hansen, S. H., Persson, C.,et al. (2017). Phylogeny predicts the quantity of antimalarial alkaloids within the iconicyellow cinchona bark (Rubiaceae: cinchona calisaya). Front. Plant Sci. 8. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2017.00391Meshnick, S. R., and Dobson, M. J. (2001). “The history of antimalarial drugs,” inAntimalarial chemotherapy (New Jersey: Humana Press), 15–25. doi: 10.1385/1-59259-111-6:15Meyer, C., Weigelt, P., and Kreft, H. (2016). Multidimensional biases, gaps anduncertainties in global plant occurrence information. Ecol. Lett. 19, 992–1006. doi:10.1111/ele.12624Micci-Barreca, D. (2001). A preprocessing scheme for high-cardinality categoricalattributes in classification and prediction problems. ACM SIGKDD Explor. Newslett. 3,27–32. doi: 10.1145/507533.507538Milliken, W., Walker, B. E., Howes, M.-J. R., Forest, F., and Nic Lughadha, E. (2021).Plants used traditionally as antimalarials in Latin America: mining the tree of life for potentialnew medicines. J. Ethnopharmacology 279, 114221. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2021.114221Mitaine-Offer, A.-C., Sauvain, M., Valentin, A., Callapa, J., Mallié, M., and Zèches-Hanrot, M. (2002). Antiplasmodial activity of aspidosperma indole alkaloids.Phytomedicine 9, 142–145. doi: 10.1078/0944-7113-00094Mothana, R. A., Al-Musayeib, N. M., Al-Ajmi, M. F., Cos, P., and Maes, L. (2014).Evaluation of the In vitro antiplasmodial, antileishmanial, and antitrypanosomalactivity of medicinal plants used in Saudi and Yemeni traditional medicine.Evidence-Based Complementary Altern. Med. 2014, 1–7. doi: 10.1155/2014/905639MPNS (2022) Medicinal plant names services, version 11 (Royal Botanic Gardens,Kew) (Accessed 18/01/2022).Muhammad, I., Dunbar, D. C., Khan, S. I., Tekwani, B. L., Bedir, E., Takamatsu, S.,et al. (2003). Antiparasitic alkaloids from Psychotria klugii. J. Natural Products 66, 962–967. doi: 10.1021/np030086kNewman, D. J., and Cragg, G. M. (2020). Natural products as sources of new drugsover the nearly four decades from 01/1981 to 09/2019. J. Natural Products 83, 770–803.doi: 10.1021/acs.jnatprod.9b01285Ocan, M., Akena, D., Nsobya, S., Kamya, M. R., Senono, R., Kinengyere, A. A., et al. (2019).Persistence of chloroquine resistance alleles inmalaria endemic countries: a systematic review ofburden and risk factors. Malaria J. 18, 1–15. doi: 10.1186/s12936-019-2716-zPearson, K. (1900). On the criterion that a given system of deviations from theprobable in the case of a correlated system of variables is such that it can be reasonablysupposed to have arisen from random sampling. London Edinburgh Dublin Philos.Magazine J. Sci. 50, 157–175. doi: 10.1080/14786440009463897Pedregosa, F., Varoquaux, G., Gramfort, A., Michel, V., Thirion, B., Grisel, O., et al.(2011). Scikit-learn: machine learning in Python. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 12, 2825–2830.Pellicer, J., Saslis-Lagoudakis, C. H., Carrió, E., Ernst, M., Garnatje, T., Grace, O. M.,et al. (2018). A phylogenetic road map to antimalarial artemisia species. J.Ethnopharmacology 225, 1–9. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2018.06.030Philippe, G., Angenot, L., Mol, P. D., Goffin, E., Hayette, M.-P., Tits, M., et al. (2005).In vitro screening of some strychnos species for antiplasmodial activity. J.Ethnopharmacology 97, 535–539. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2004.12.011Poggio, L., De Sousa, L. M., Batjes, N. H., Heuvelink, G., Kempen, B., Ribeiro, E.,et al. (2021). SoilGrids 2.0: producing soil information for the globe with quantifiedspatial uncertainty. Soil 7, 217–240. doi: 10.5194/soil-7-217-2021POWO (2022). Plants of the world online (Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew). Availableat: http://www.plantsoftheworldonline.org/.Qinghaosu Antimalaria Coordinating Research group (1979). Antimalaria studieson qinghaosu. Chin. Med. J. 92, 811–816.Ramalhete, C., Lopes, D., Mulhovo, S., Rosário, V. E., and Ferreira, M. (2008).“Antimalarial activity of some plants traditionally used in Mozambique,” in Workshopplantas medicinais e fitoterape ̂uticas nos trópicos, vol. 29. (IICT/CCCM), 30.Rasoanaivo, P., Deharo, E., Ratsimamanga-Urveg, S., and Frappier, F. (2004a).“Guidelines for the nonclinical evaluation of the efficacy of traditional antimalarials,” inTraditional medicinal plants and malaria (Boca Raton: CRC Press), 324–341.Rasoanaivo, P., Ramanitrahasimbola, D., Rafatro, H., Rakotondramanana, D.,Robijaona, B., Rakotozafy, A., et al. (2004b). Screening extracts of madagascan plantsin search of antiplasmodial compounds: screening extracts of madagascan plants forantiplasmodial compounds. Phytotherapy Res. 18, 742–747. doi: 10.1002/ptr.1533Rønsted, N., Symonds, M. R. E., Birkholm, T., Christensen, S., Meerow, A. W.,Molander, M., et al. (2012). Can phylogeny predict chemical diversity and potentialmedicinal activity of plants? a case study of amaryllidaceae. BMC Evolutionary Biol. 12,182. doi: 10.1186/1471-2148-12-182Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew (2021). LitTox database (London: Royal BotanicGardens, Kew).Satish, P., Kumari, D., and Sunita, K. (2017). Antiplasmodial efficacy of calotropisgigantea (L.) against plasmodium falciparum (3D7 strain) and plasmodium berghei(ANKA). J. Vector Borne Dis. 54, 215. doi: 10.4103/0972-9062.217612frontiersin.orgRichard-Bollans et al. 10.3389/fpls.2023.1173328Silvestro, D., and Andermann, T. (2020). Prior choice affects ability of Bayesianneural networks to identify unknowns. ArXiv. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2005.04987Singh, N., Kaushik, N. K., Mohanakrishnan, D., Tiwari, S. K., and Sahal, D. (2015).Antiplasmodial activity of medicinal plants from chhotanagpur plateau, jharkhand,India. J. Ethnopharmacology 165, 152–162. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2015.02.038Smirnov, N. V. (1939). Estimate of deviation between empirical distributionfunctions in two independent samples. Bull. Moscow Univ. 2, 3–16.Solis, P. N., Lang’at, C., Gupta, M. P., Kirby, G. C., Warhurst, D. C., and Phillipson, J.D. (1995). Bio-active compounds from psychotria camponutans. Planta Med. 61, 62–65. doi: 10.1055/s-2006-958001Soto-Sobenis, A., Castillo, B., Delgado, A., González, A., and Montenegro, R. (2001).Alkaloid screening of herbarium samples of rubiaceae from Panama. Pharm. Biol. 39,161–169. doi: 10.1076/phbi.39.3.161.5925Suksamrarn, A., Tanachatchairatana, T., and Kanokmedhakul, S. (2003).Antiplasmodial triterpenes from twigs of gardenia saxatilis. J. Ethnopharmacology 88,275–277. doi: 10.1016/S0378-8741(03)00261-7Taek, M.M., Tukan, G. D., Prajogo, B. E.W., and Agil, M. (2021). Antiplasmodial activityand phytochemical constituents of selected antimalarial plants used by native people inWesttimor Indonesia. Turkish J. Pharm. Sci. 18, 80–90. doi: 10.4274/tjps.galenos.2019.29000The World Bank (2022) World development indicators. Available at: https://datacatalog.worldbank.org/search/dataset/0037712 (Accessed 2022-05-03).Tomlinson, M. L., Zhao, M., Barclay, E. J., Li, J., Li, H., Felix, J., et al. (2022).Diterpenoids from scutellaria barbata induce tumour-selective cytotoxicity by takingthe brakes off apoptosis. Medicinal Plant Biol. 1, 1–16. doi: 10.48130/MPB-2022-0003USDA (2022a) Dr. duke’s phytochemical and ethnobotanical databases (Accessed2022-02-22).USDA (2022b) The PLANTS database. Available at: http://plants.usda.gov (Accessed2022-01-10).Uwimana, A., Legrand, E., Stokes, B. H., Ndikumana, J.-L. M., Warsame, M.,Umulisa, N., et al. (2020). Emergence and clonal expansion of in vitro artemisinin-resistant plasmodium falciparum kelch13 R561H mutant parasites in Rwanda. Nat.Med. 26, 1602–1608. doi: 10.1038/s41591-020-1005-2Visscher, A. M., Vandelook, F., Fernández-Pascual, E., Pérez-Martıńez, L. V., Ulian,T., Diazgranados, M., et al. (2022). Low availability of functional seed trait data from theFrontiers in Plant Science 14tropics could negatively affect global macroecological studies, predictive models andplant conservation. Ann Bot 130 (6), 773–784. doi: 10.1093/aob/mcac130Weenen, H., Nkunya, M., Bray, D., Mwasumbi, L., Kinabo, L., and Kilimali, V.(1990). Antimalarial activity of Tanzanian medicinal plants. Planta Medica 56, 368–370. doi: 10.1055/s-2006-960984Weniger, B., Robledo, S., Arango, G. J., Deharo, E., Aragón, R., Muñoz, V., et al.(2001). Antiprotozoal activities of Colombian plants. J. Ethnopharmacology 78, 193–200. doi: 10.1016/S0378-8741(01)00346-4WHO (2008). World malaria report 2008 (Geneva: World Health Organization).WHO (2017). A framework for malaria elimination (Geneva: World HealthOrganization).WHO. (2021). World health organization model list of essential medicines: 22nd list.tech. rep (Geneva: World Health Organization).WHO (2022a) Global health observatory: number of indigenous malaria cases(World Health Organization). Available at: https://www.who.int/data/gho/data/indicators/indicator-details/GHO/number-of-indigenous-malaria-cases (Accessed2022-09-14).WHO (2022b). World malaria report 2022 (Geneva: World Health Organization).Wong, S. K., Lim, Y. Y., Abdullah, N. R., and Nordin, F. J. (2011). Assessment ofantiproliferative and antiplasmodial activities offive selected apocynaceae species. BMCComplementary Altern. Med. 11, 3. doi: 10.1186/1472-6882-11-3Wright, C. W., Allen, D., Cai, Y., Phillipson, J., Said, I., Kirby, G., et al. (1992). Invitro antiamoebic and antiplasmodial activities of alkaloids isolated from alstoniaangustifolia roots. Phytotherapy Res. 6, 121–124. doi: 10.1002/ptr.2650060303Zadrozny, B. (2004). “Learning and evaluating classifiers under sample selectionbias,” in Twenty-first international conference on machine learning - ICML ‘04 (Banff,Alberta, Canada: ACM Press), 114. doi: 10.1145/1015330.1015425Zizka, A., Silvestro, D., Andermann, T., Azevedo, J., Duarte Ritter, C., Edler, D., et al.(2019). CoordinateCleaner: standardized cleaning of occurrence records frombiological collection databases. Methods Ecol. Evol. 10, 744–751. doi: 10.1111/2041-210X.13152Zu, P., Koch, H., Schwery, O., Pironon, S., Phillips, C., Ondo, I., et al. (2021). Pollensterols are associated with phylogeny and environment but not with pollinator guilds.New Phytol. 230, 1169–1184. doi: 10.1111/nph.17227frontiersin.org