fpls-09-00942 July 4, 2018 Time: 19:5 # 1
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 06 July 2018
doi: 10.3389/fpls.2018.00942
Edited by:
Philipp Zerbe,
University of California, Davis,
United States
Reviewed by:
Carsten Kulheim,
Australian National University,
Australia
Henrik Toft Simonsen,
Technical University of Denmark,
Denmark
Sibongile Mafu,
University of Massachusetts Amherst,
United States
*Correspondence:
Dinesh A. Nagegowda
da.nagegowda@cimap.res.in
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Plant Metabolism
and Chemodiversity,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Plant Science
Received: 13 April 2018
Accepted: 12 June 2018
Published: 06 July 2018
Citation:
Kumar SR, Shilpashree HB and
Nagegowda DA (2018) Terpene
Moiety Enhancement by
Overexpression of Geranyl(geranyl)
Diphosphate Synthase and Geraniol
Synthase Elevates Monomeric
and Dimeric Monoterpene Indole
Alkaloids in Transgenic Catharanthus
roseus. Front. Plant Sci. 9:942.
doi: 10.3389/fpls.2018.00942
Terpene Moiety Enhancement by
Overexpression of Geranyl(geranyl)
Diphosphate Synthase and Geraniol
Synthase Elevates Monomeric and
Dimeric Monoterpene Indole
Alkaloids in Transgenic
Catharanthus roseus
Sarma R. Kumar, H. B. Shilpashree and Dinesh A. Nagegowda*
Molecular Plant Biology and Biotechnology Lab, Research Centre, CSIR-Central Institute of Medicinal and Aromatic Plants,
Bengaluru, India
Catharanthus roseus is the sole source of two of the most important anticancer
monoterpene indole alkaloids (MIAs), vinblastine and vincristine and their precursors,
vindoline and catharanthine. The MIAs are produced from the condensation of
precursors derived from indole and terpene secoiridoid pathways. It has been
previously reported that the terpene moiety limits MIA biosynthesis in C. roseus.
Here, to overcome this limitation and enhance MIAs levels in C. roseus, bifunctional
geranyl(geranyl) diphosphate synthase [G(G)PPS] and geraniol synthase (GES) that
provide precursors for early steps of terpene moiety (secologanin) formation, were
overexpressed transiently by agroinfiltration and stably by Agrobacterium-mediated
transformation. Both transient and stable overexpression of G(G)PPS and co-expression
of G(G)PPS+GES significantly enhanced the accumulation of secologanin, which in
turn elevated the levels of monomeric MIAs. In addition, transgenic C. roseus plants
exhibited increased levels of root alkaloid ajmalicine. The dimeric alkaloid vinblastine was
enhanced only in G(G)PPS but not in G(G)PPS+GES transgenic lines that correlated
with transcript levels of peroxidase-1 (PRX1) involved in coupling of vindoline and
catharanthine into 3′,4′-anhydrovinblastine, the immediate precursor of vinblastine.
Moreover, first generation (T1) lines exhibited comparable transcript and metabolite
levels to that of T0 lines. In addition, transgenic lines displayed normal growth similar
to wild-type plants indicating that the bifunctional G(G)PPS enhanced flux toward both
primary and secondary metabolism. These results revealed that improved availability
of early precursors for terpene moiety biosynthesis enhanced production of MIAs in
C. roseus at the whole plant level. This is the first report demonstrating enhanced
accumulation of monomeric and dimeric MIAs including root MIA ajmalicine in C. roseus
through transgenic approaches.
Keywords: Catharanthus roseus, geraniol synthase, geranyl(geranyl) diphosphate synthase, overexpression,
monoterpene indole alkaloids, transgenic plant
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org 1 July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 942
fpls-09-00942 July 4, 2018 Time: 19:5 # 2
Kumar et al. Transgenic Periwinkle With Enhanced MIAs
INTRODUCTION
Catharanthus roseus (Madagascar Periwinkle) is the best-
characterized monoterpene indole alkaloids (MIAs)-producing
plant species. To date, C. roseus remains the only natural
source of two medicinally valuable dimeric MIAs vinblastine
and vincristine, and their monomeric precursors vindoline
and catharanthine (Miettinen et al., 2014; Kellner et al.,
2015). While leaf specific dimeric alkaloids vinblastine and
vincristine are used either directly or as derivatives in cancer
chemotherapy, roots accumulate monomeric alkaloids ajmalicine
and serpentine which are used as anti-hypertensive agents
(Zhao et al., 2013). Coupling of the monomeric precursors
vindoline and catharanthine to α-3′,4′-anhydrovinblastine and
its subsequent conversion results in the formation of dimeric
vinblastine and vincristine (Costa et al., 2008). Extremely low
in planta accumulation of dimeric alkaloids makes them highly
expensive. Approximately 500 kg of dry leaves is required
to isolate 1 g of vinblastine for pharmaceutical production
(Noble, 1990). Moreover, total chemical synthesis of dimeric
alkaloids is economically not viable due to their complex
structures (Kuboyama et al., 2004; van Der Heijden et al., 2004;
Ishikawa et al., 2008). Furthermore, improving the production
of monomeric vindoline and dimeric alkaloids in cell suspension
and hairy root cultures is challenging as they lack the required
level of cellular and tissue differentiation essential for the
expression of entire MIAs pathway genes, especially the genes
involved in vindoline biosynthesis (Zarate and Verpoorte, 2007;
Guirimand et al., 2009). Such a scenario calls for genetic
transformation of C. roseus for improvement of MIAs production
at the whole plant level.
To date, genetic transformation in C. roseus has been
mostly confined to hairy roots and cell cultures (Choi et al.,
2004; Peebles et al., 2006; Jaggi et al., 2011; Sun et al., 2017).
Moreover, transgenic C. roseus cell suspension cultures do
not produce alkaloids in a stable manner and their ability to
accumulate MIAs declines by prolonged subculture (Whitmer
et al., 2003). Not many efforts have been made with respect
to metabolic engineering of C. roseus plants, as they are
hard-to-transform owing to their highly recalcitrant nature for
genetic transformation. Lately, some reports have demonstrated
the generation of transgenic C. roseus through Agrobacterium
tumefaciens-mediated transformation (Verma and Mathur,
2011b; Pan et al., 2012; Wang Q. et al., 2012). Direct shoot
bud organogenesis and transformation were achieved using
pre-plasmolyzed leaf explants and β-glucuronidase (GUS)
expression was confirmed in transgenic plants (Verma and
Mathur, 2011b). However, there are only few reports pertaining
to development of transgenic C. roseus overexpressing MIA
pathway genes or regulators (Pan et al., 2012; Wang Q.
et al., 2012). It was shown that transgenic overexpression of
deacetylvindoline-4-O-acetyltransferase (DAT) in C. roseus
plants resulted in improved accumulation of vindoline
(Wang Q. et al., 2012). Another study from the same group
reported enhanced production of ajmalicine, catharanthine
and vindoline in transgenic C. roseus overexpressing geraniol
10-hydroxylase (G10H) and the transcriptional regulator
Octadecanoid-derivative Responsive Catharanthus AP2-domain
(ORCA3) (Pan et al., 2012; Wang Q. et al., 2012).
Monoterpene indole alkaloids are derived from the central
intermediate strictosidine, which is formed by the condensation
of indole pathway derived tryptamine and monoterpene iridoid
precursor secologanin in a reaction catalyzed by the enzyme
strictosidine synthase (STR) (Figure 1). While the indole moiety
tryptamine is formed from tryptophan, the iridoid biosynthesis
starts from the monoterpene geraniol. Geraniol is formed
from geranyl diphosphate (GPP) by the action of a terpene
synthase, geraniol synthase (GES). GPP, the universal precursor
of monoterpenes, is produced by the condensation of isopentenyl
diphosphate (IPP) and dimethylallyl diphosphate (DMAPP)
by GPP synthase (GPPS) (Dudareva et al., 2006; Nagegowda,
2010). Geraniol is further oxidized by geraniol-10-hydroxylase/8-
oxidase (G8O) to 8-hydroxygeraniol, which is then converted to
loganin and finally to secologanin by multiple enzymatic steps
(Miettinen et al., 2014). In plants, GPPS functions at the branch
point of general and specialized metabolism and regulates flux
to monoterpene biosynthesis (Orlova et al., 2009; Nagegowda,
2010). In tobacco, overexpression of snapdragon GPPS small
subunit (GPPS.SSU) resulted in an increased monoterpene
emission in leaves. However, plants were dwarfed and exhibited
strong leaf chlorotic symptoms together with increased light
sensitivity due to reduction in the level of primary metabolites
(Orlova et al., 2009). In another study, co-expression of
peppermint GPS.SSU with four different monoterpene synthases
boosted monoterpene production in transgenic tobacco without
negatively affecting plant growth (Yin et al., 2017). These
studies indicate that, overexpression of either GPPS alone or
co-expression of GPPS with a monoterpene synthase could
enhance the production of monoterpenes.
In C. roseus, the heteromeric GPPS consisting of an enzymatic
large subunit (LSU) and an inactive small subunit (SSU) is
involved in providing GPP required for MIA biosynthesis. The
LSU is a bifunctional G(G)PP synthase [G(G)PPS] that produces
both GPP and GGPP in a ∼2:1 ratio (Rai et al., 2013). Further,
GPP is utilized by the monoterpene synthase GES, which is
transcriptionally regulated and its transient overexpression in
leaves enhanced monomeric alkaloids in C. roseus (Kumar et al.,
2015). It has been reported in cell cultures that the terpene moiety
is limiting for the biosynthesis of MIAs (Peebles et al., 2006).
Moreover, we have previously shown by feeding studies that
geraniol and not tryptophan is limiting for the biosynthesis of
vindoline and catharanthine in C. roseus leaves (Kumar et al.,
2015). Thus, enhanced availability of early secoiridoid pathway
precursors (GPP and geraniol) could push the flux toward
secologanin, which in turn could enhance the accumulation
of end products (monomeric/dimeric alkaloids). In this work,
we overexpressed a bifunctional G(G)PPS, and co-expressed
G(G)PPS and GES in transgenic C. roseus plants that were
generated through Agrobacterium-mediated transformation.
Transgenic plants accumulated enhanced secologanin, vindoline,
catharanthine, ajmalicine and vinblastine without any negative
effects on plant growth, thus demonstrating the importance of
metabolic engineering at the whole plant level for improvement
of monomeric and dimeric MIAs production in C. roseus.
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org 2 July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 942
fpls-09-00942 July 4, 2018 Time: 19:5 # 3
Kumar et al. Transgenic Periwinkle With Enhanced MIAs
FIGURE 1 | Simplified version of monoterpene indole alkaloids (MIAs) biosynthetic pathway in C. roseus. Full and dashed arrows indicate single and multiple
enzymatic steps, respectively. The genes used to generate transgenic plants, geranyl(geranyl) diphosphate synthase [G(G)PPS] and geraniol synthase (GES), are
boxed. Structures of analyzed metabolites in this study are shown in gray highlighted boxes. DMAPP, dimethylallyl diphosphate; G8O, geraniol-10-hydroxylase/
8-oxidase; GPP, geranyl diphosphate; IPP, isopentenyl diphosphate; PRX1, peroxidase 1; SLS, secologanin synthase; STR, strictosidine synthase; TDC, tryptophan
decarboxylase.
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org 3 July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 942
fpls-09-00942 July 4, 2018 Time: 19:5 # 4
Kumar et al. Transgenic Periwinkle With Enhanced MIAs
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Generation of Plant Overexpression
Vectors
For generation of G(G)PPS plant overexpression construct,
the open reading frame corresponding to 1,152 bp was
PCR-amplified from leaf cDNA of C. roseus (cv. Dhawal)
using full length gene-specific primers (Supplementary Table
S1) containing XbaI and SacI sites. The amplified coding
regions were cloned into the pJET1.2 vector and nucleotide
sequences were confirmed by Sanger sequencing. Resulting
pJET constructs were restriction digested and G(G)PPS was
sub-cloned into XbaI and SacI sites of pBI121 binary vector
under the control of 35S promoter of Cauliflower mosaic virus
(CaMV) to form pBI121::G(G)PPS construct (Supplementary
Figure S1). Agrobacterium tumefaciens strain GV3101 was
transformed with pBI121 empty vector and pBI121::G(G)PPS
construct by freeze-thaw method. For GES overexpression, the
plant overexpression construct pBI121::GES reported in Kumar
et al. (2015) was used.
Transient Overexpression in C. roseus
Transient overexpression was performed following the method
described in Kumar et al. (2015). Briefly, overnight grown
Agrobacteria cultures were pelleted and resuspended in
infiltration buffer (50 mM MES pH 5.6, 2 mM Na3PO4, 0.5%
glucose and 100 µM acetosyringone) to a final OD600 of 0.2.
The Agrobacteria suspension was incubated at 28◦C for 4 h.
Infiltration was performed into the first pair of leaves of 3-week-
old C. roseus plants using a needle-less syringe. Post-infiltration,
plants were covered and maintained in the dark for 48 h.
Infiltrated leaves were harvested and used for subsequent gene
expression and metabolite analyses.
Generation of Transgenic C. roseus
Plants
C. roseus (cv. Dhawal) seeds were surface sterilized using
4% sodium hypochlorite and inoculated in half strength MS
(Murashige and Skoog, 1962) medium. In vitro grown hypocotyl
and nodal explants were used for generation of G(G)PPS and
G(G)PPS+GES transgenic lines, respectively. While G(G)PPS
transformants were generated by indirect regeneration using
hypocotyl explants according to Wang Q. et al. (2012), plants co-
expressing G(G)PPS+GES were generated by direct regeneration
using nodal explants following the method reported in Verma
and Mathur (2011a).
For generating transgenic plants through indirect
regeneration using hypocotyls explants, MS basal medium
was supplemented with 250 mg/L proline and 150 mg/L casein
hydrolysate (MSCP) with appropriate hormones as follows.
Hypocotyl explants were precultured in MSCP1 medium [MSCP
with 1.0 mg/L 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4-D), 1.0 mg/L
α-naphthalene acetic acid (NAA) and 0.1 mg/L zeatin] for
3 days. After co-cultivation with Agrobacteria cultures, explants
were transferred to MSCP1 selection medium for a week and
subsequently transferred to MSCP2 medium [MSCP with
5.0 mg/L 6-benzyl adenine (BA), 0.5 mg/L NAA] for callus
induction. Finally, the initiated shoots were transferred to
MSCP3 shoot regeneration medium [MSCP with 1.75 mg/L BA,
0.55 mg/L indole-3-acetic acid (IAA)].
For direct regeneration, nodal explants (1–2 cm) were
excised from 1-month-old in vitro grown C. roseus plants.
Subsequently, nodal explants were co-cultivated with 1:1 mixture
of Agrobacteria harboring pBI121::G(G)PPS and pBI121::GES
(OD600 0.4–0.6) for 10 min. The explants were then blot-dried
and inoculated into MS-BNT medium containing 1 mg/L BA,
0.1 mg/L NAA and 400 mg/L thiamine HCl. After 3 days
of co-cultivation in dark, explants were transferred to fresh
MS-BNT medium containing kanamycin and carbenicillin. For
shoot proliferation, explants were continued to be cultured in
the same medium by subculturing every 10 days. After five
rounds of subculturing, well developed shoots were transferred
to half strength MS medium for rooting. In both cases, our
own modifications were made for rooting as outlined below.
After obtaining putative transgenic shoots, they were excised
and inoculated initially in rooting media consisting of half
strength MS with 2 mg/L indole-3-butyric acid (IBA) and
300 mg/L carbenicillin until root initiation. Later, these plants
were transferred to half strength MS with 2.4 µM IBA and
300 mg/L carbenicillin. Plants with well developed roots were
transplanted to pots containing 1:1 sterile soilrite:vermicompost
mix, and transferred to glass house after acclimation.
PCR Confirmation of Transgenic Lines
and Quantitative Reverse
Transcriptase-PCR (qRT-PCR) Analysis
Genomic DNA was isolated from wild type (WT) controls
and putative transgenic lines following the protocol reported
by Doyle and Doyle (1990). Briefly, leaf disks were ground
with preheated extraction buffer (1.4 M NaCl, 20 mM EDTA,
100 mM Tris HCl, 0.2% β-Mercaptoethanol, 2% PVP, and
2% CTAB) and incubated at 65◦C for 1 h with intermittent
shaking. An equal volume of 24:1 chloroform:isoamyl alcohol
was added to separate the aqueous phase. The DNA was
precipitated by adding 0.6 volume of ice-cold isopropanol
to the aqueous phase and incubated overnight at −20◦C.
Precipitated genomic DNA was then washed with 70% ethanol
and finally resuspended in milli Q water. Transgenic lines
were confirmed by PCR screening using appropriate primers.
In the case of G(G)PPS lines, 35S promoter-specific forward
and G(G)PPS-specific reverse primers were used. For screening
G(G)PPS+GES lines, 35S/nptII promoter-specific forward and
35S/G(G)PPS/GES/nptII specific reverse primers were used
(Supplementary Table S1). RNA isolation, cDNA synthesis and
qRT-PCR were performed in transgenic lines following the
procedure reported in Rai et al. (2013) and Kumar et al. (2015).
Total RNA was extracted from 100 mg leaf tissue using the
SpectrumTM Plant Total RNA kit (Sigma-Aldrich, United States)
following manufacturer’s instructions. To remove contaminating
genomic DNA, on-column DNase digestion was performed with
DNase I (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, United States). Total
RNA (2 µg) was used for first strand cDNA synthesis with
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org 4 July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 942
fpls-09-00942 July 4, 2018 Time: 19:5 # 5
Kumar et al. Transgenic Periwinkle With Enhanced MIAs
random hexamer primers using High Capacity cDNA Reverse
Transcription kit (Applied Biosystems, United States) as per
manufacturer’s instructions. qRT-PCR was performed with a
linear range of cDNA using StepOne Real-Time PCR System
(Applied Biosystems, United States) and expression of transcripts
were normalized using N227 that was previously reported as
an appropriate endogenous gene in C. roseus (Pollier et al.,
2014). qRT-PCR reaction mixture of 5 µl contained 2.5 µl of 2X
Maxima SYBR Green/ROX qPCR master mix (Thermo Scientific,
United States), 1:3 diluted cDNA and 2 µM gene-specific primers
(Supplementary Table S1). The following conditions were used
for qRT-PCR: 94◦C for 10 min for first cycle, followed by 94◦C
for 15 s and 60◦C for 15 s for 40 cycles. Fold change differences
in gene expression were analyzed by the comparative cycle
threshold (Ct) method. Relative quantification was carried out
by calculating Ct to determine fold difference in gene expression
[1Ct target – 1Ct calibrator]. The relative level was determined
as 2−11CT. All experiments were repeated using three biological
replicates with three technical replicates and data were analyzed
statistically as mentioned below.
Alkaloid Extraction, Analysis, and
Quantification
Secologanin, vindoline, catharanthine, ajmalicine, and
vinblastine were quantified using High Performance Liquid
Chromatography (HPLC) having Photodiode Array (PDA)
detector. HPLC (Model: SCL-10AVP, Shimadzu, Japan)
equipped with C18 symmetry reverse phase column (5 µm,
250 mm × 4.6 mm, Waters, Milford, MA, United States) was
used for all analyses. Secologanin was extracted and quantified
according to Tikhomiroff and Jolicoeur (2002) with minor
modifications. Fresh leaves (50 mg) from 2-month-old plants
were extracted in 1.5 ml methanol for 60 min in a sonicating bath.
The extract was centrifuged and the supernatant was decolorized
by adding activated charcoal. Subsequently, the supernatant was
transferred to a fresh tube and evaporated to dryness. The dried
residue was dissolved in 20 µl methanol and used for HPLC
analysis. Mobile phase for HPLC consisted of 15:85 (v/v) mixture
of gradient grade acetonitrile:phosphoric acid (0.1 M, pH 2.0)
with a flow-rate of 1.5 ml/min. HPLC was performed in isocratic
mode for 20 min.
Vindoline and catharanthine were extracted following
protocol of Lourdes Miranda-Ham et al. (2007). Briefly, oven
dried leaf tissue (10 mg) collected from 2-month-old plants
were grounded in 2 ml methanol and incubated at 55◦C for
2 h with occasional shaking. The obtained extract was filtered
and evaporated to dryness. The residue was dissolved in 700
µl of 2.5% H2SO4 and extracted twice with equal volumes
of ethyl acetate. Aqueous phase was retained each time and
subsequently, pH of the aqueous phase was adjusted to 9.0
using NH4OH. Finally, alkaloids were extracted with equal
volume of ethyl acetate and the resulting organic phase was
evaporated to dryness. The residue containing alkaloids was
dissolved in 20 µl methanol and used in HPLC analysis. Mobile
phase for HPLC consisted of a mixture of A (0.1 M ammonium
acetate buffer, pH 7.3) and B (gradient grade acetonitrile) with
1 ml/min flow rate of 70:30 ratio of A:B for first 5 min of run
and then was linearly ramped to 36:64 for next 5 min with
flow rate of 1.4 ml/min. Subsequently, the ratio was changed
to 20:80 with 1.4 ml/min for next 5 min and finally the flow
rate was reduced to 1 ml/min with 70:30 ratios in the last
5 min.
Ajmalicine and vinblastine were extracted and quantified
following the method described in Pan et al. (2016). Briefly,
oven dried young leaves (50 mg) collected from 2-month-
old plants for vinblastine and roots (200 mg) from 1-year-old
plants maintained in glass house for ajmalicine were extracted
with 1 ml methanol by sonication (30 min). Samples were
centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 10 min at room temperature
and the supernatant was decolorized (for leaf samples) by
adding activated charcoal. The resulting methanolic extract was
evaporated to dryness, resuspended in 20 µl methanol and used
for HPLC quantification. The mobile phase consisted of a mixture
of 5 mM Na2HPO4 (pH 6.0) (solvent A) and gradient grade
methanol (solvent B) at a flow rate of 1.5 ml per min. The change
in mobile phase was set to a linear gradient from 86:14 to 14:86
at 0–26 min in isocratic mode (14:86 v/v at 26–30 min), a linear
gradient from 14:86 to 86:14 at 30–35 min, an isocratic elution
with 14:86 (v/v) at 35–40 min. Data was extracted at 238 nm for
secologanin, 254 nm for vindoline, catharanthine, ajmalicine, and
vinblastine. Peak area obtained from authentic standards (Sigma-
Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, United States) (Supplementary Figure S2)
and samples were used to quantify alkaloids and expressed as
relative content in %.
Chlorophyll and Carotenoids
Quantification, and Phenotypic Analyses
The amount of total chlorophyll and carotenoids was quantified
according to Lichtenthaler (1987). Briefly, 20 mg of leaf (third
developmental stage) was extracted in 98% ethanol for 2 h.
The supernatant was used for quantification of chlorophyll and
carotenoids. The absorbance was measured at 470, 653, and
666 nm and the amount of chlorophyll a, chlorophyll b, and
total carotenoids was calculated. Flowers of T0 transgenic lines
were selfed individually and siliques were collected separately
from individual transgenic lines. The seeds were germinated
and screened by PCR to select the first generation T1 positive
plants from each transgenic line. Phenotypic parameters such as
number of leaves, branches, flowers and siliques formed in WT
and selected T1 transgenic lines were analyzed.
Copy Number Determination in
Transgenic C. roseus Lines
Copy number of G(G)PPS and GES in transgenic G(G)PPS and
G(G)PPS+GES lines were confirmed by using qPCR as described
previously (Weng et al., 2004; Yi et al., 2008; Li et al., 2017).
For absolute quantification, standard curve was generated using
twofold dilutions of genomic DNA extracted from WT controls,
selected G(G)PPS and all three lines of G(G)PPS+GES using
primers of G(G)PPS, GES, and tryptophan decarboxylase [TDC,
the endogenous single copy gene as determined by Goddijn
et al. (1994)]. Three separate sets of reactions were performed to
amplify G(G)PPS, GES, and TDC. Each reaction (5 µl) contained
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org 5 July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 942
fpls-09-00942 July 4, 2018 Time: 19:5 # 6
Kumar et al. Transgenic Periwinkle With Enhanced MIAs
2.5 µl of 2X Maxima SYBR Green PCR master mix (Thermo
Scientific, United States), 100 ng genomic DNA and 2 µM
gene-specific primers. Reaction was performed as follows: 94◦C
for 10 min for first cycle, followed by 94◦C for 15 s and 60◦C
for 15 s for 40 cycles. The PCR efficiency of target genes and
TDC were calculated from slope of standard curve for each gene.
The number of copies of G(G)PPS and GES were determined
according to Pfaffl (2001).
Statistical Analysis
Average mean, standard error (SE) and number of replicates
(n) used for individual experiment were employed for statistical
analysis using the GraphPad QUICKCALC online software1.
Statistical significance of differences between control and samples
were tested according to the unpaired Student’s t-test.
RESULTS
Transient Overexpression of G(G)PPS
and G(G)PPS+GES Resulted in
Increased Alkaloid Accumulation
Transient overexpression by agroinfiltration either in the host
plant or in heterologous systems has been widely used for
determining the gene function. Moreover, it is an efficient
strategy for functional analyses of genes in those plants
where the study of gene function is limited owing to very
low transformation efficiency and recalcitrant nature of the
plant for genetic transformation. Hence, before proceeding
for genetic transformation of C. roseus with G(G)PPS and
G(G)PPS+GES, we carried out transient overexpression of
these genes to determine their effect on MIA biosynthesis.
As G(G)PPS and GES were previously reported to positively
influence MIA biosynthesis in C. roseus (Rai et al., 2013; Kumar
et al., 2015), we hypothesized that improved availability of
precursors (GPP and geraniol) by overexpression of G(G)PPS
and co-expression of G(G)PPS+GES could enhance MIA
accumulation in C. roseus leaves. As the MIA content varies
with leaf developmental stages, both genes were transiently
overexpressed in first pair of leaves (that exhibit highest alkaloid
accumulation). While, overexpression of G(G)PPS resulted in
>30-fold transcript increase, co-expression of G(G)PPS+GES
lead to ∼14- and 8-fold increase in transcripts of G(G)PPS
and GES, respectively (Figures 2A,B). Next, to determine
the effect of G(G)PPS and G(G)PPS+GES overexpression on
alkaloid accumulation, first we checked the level of terpenoid
intermediate secologanin. HPLC analysis showed ∼2.8-
and 2.2-fold increase in secologanin levels in G(G)PPS and
G(G)PPS+GES infiltrated leaves, respectively, compared to
empty vector pBI121 controls (Figures 2C,D and Supplementary
Figures S3A,B). Subsequent analysis of the monomeric alkaloids
in G(G)PPS infiltrated leaves revealed ∼3- and ∼6-fold increase
in vindoline and catharanthine, respectively (Figure 2C
and Supplementary Figure S3A). Similarly, G(G)PPS+GES
1http://www.graphpad.com/quickcalcs/ttest1.cfm
co-infiltrated leaves exhibited an increase of ∼2.5 and ∼3.2-fold
vindoline and catharanthine (Figure 2D and Supplementary
Figure S3B). Higher accumulation of secologanin, vindoline and
catharanthine could be attributed to dramatic increase in the
availability of accumulated transcripts as a result of transient
overexpression. Taken together, our results clearly demonstrated
that overexpression of G(G)PPS and G(G)PPS+GES can
improve the metabolic flux toward MIA biosynthesis in
C. roseus.
Generation of Transgenic C. roseus
Plants Overexpressing G(G)PPS and
G(G)PPS+GES
In order to substantiate our findings of transient overexpression
studies and to demonstrate the in planta role of G(G)PPS and
G(G)PPS+GES in improving MIA production, we generated
transgenicC. roseus overexpressingG(G)PPS andG(G)PPS+GES.
So far, very few efforts have been made with respect to
metabolic engineering of C. roseus plant due to its highly
recalcitrant nature for genetic transformation together with
low transformation efficiency. Lately, some reports have shown
the generation of transgenic C. roseus through A. tumefaciens-
mediated transformation. For the generation of transgenic
C. roseus plants, culture conditions were optimized for callus
induction and indirect regeneration following Wang Q. et al.
(2012). In vitro grown hypocotyls were used as explants
for Agrobacterium-mediated genetic transformation. Hypocotyl
explants were precultured in MSCP1 (Figure 3Ai) for 3 days
prior to Agrobacterium infection as it has been reported
to improve the rate of transformation in C. roseus (Alam
et al., 2017). After co-cultivation with Agrobacterium-harboring
overexpression constructs, callus initiation was observed in most
of the explants in a week in MSCP1 supplemented with 40 mg/L
kanamycin and 300 mg/L carbenicillin. The cream colored
friable calli developed after about 3 weeks were sub-cultured
on to MSCP2 selection medium (Figure 3Aii). However, the
calli upon subculturing in MSCP2 medium turned brown in
most of the cases and died in about 1–2 weeks. After 2 weeks
of sub-culturing in MSCP2 selection medium, only 2–3% of
survived calli turned into green friable calli and shoot initiation
was observed (Figure 3Aiii). Further, the initiated shoots
were transferred to MSCP3 regeneration medium containing
appropriate antibiotics. Although the regeneration efficiency was
very less, multiple shoots were induced from embryogenic calli
in some of the transformation events (Figure 3Aiv). From
each calli, 3–4 shoots were induced and after 1 month of
shoot maturation, healthy shoots were transferred initially to
half strength MS medium supplemented with 2 mg/L IBA.
After 2 weeks, though shoots exhibited root initiation, leaves
turned yellow and exhibited necrotic symptoms in most of
the cases. Hence, a lower concentration of IBA (2.4 µM)
was used for root proliferation according to Dhandapani
et al. (2008) (Figure 3Av). Plants with well developed
roots were transferred to 1:1 sterile soilrite:vermicompost
mix and maintained in glass house conditions (Figure 3Avi
and Supplementary Figures S4A,B). The complete process of
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org 6 July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 942
fpls-09-00942 July 4, 2018 Time: 19:5 # 7
Kumar et al. Transgenic Periwinkle With Enhanced MIAs
FIGURE 2 | Effect of transient overexpression of G(G)PPS and GES in C. roseus leaves. mRNA expression (A,B) and metabolite (C,D) analyses in C. roseus leaves
infiltrated with A. tumefaciens carrying pBI121 empty vector (black bar), pBI121::G(G)PPS and co-infiltrated with pBI121::G(G)PPS+pBI121::GES (gray bar)
constructs. Transcripts were analyzed by qRT-PCR with CrN227 as an endogenous reference gene. Expression levels were normalized to CrN227 and are
represented as expression relative to the pBI121 controls that was set to 1. Relative amounts of secologanin, vindoline, and catharanthine in C. roseus leaves were
quantified by HPLC analysis. Secologanin was extracted from 50 mg (fresh weight) of leaves and quantified following Tikhomiroff and Jolicoeur (2002). The
monomeric alkaloids vindoline and catharanthine were extracted using 10 mg of oven dried leaves according to Lourdes Miranda-Ham et al. (2007), and quantified
following Kumar et al. (2015). In all cases, first pair of infiltrated leaves were used for alkaloid extraction and quantified by HPLC. The levels of quantified metabolites
are expressed in % relative to pBI121 vector infiltrated leaves. The bars represent mean ± standard error (SE) of three independent experiments. Significant
differences at P < 0.01 and P < 0.001 are represented by “∗∗” and “∗∗∗”, respectively.
transformation using hypocotyl explants from seed germination
to hardening of putative transgenic lines took approximately
4 months. Regeneration efficiency from hypocotyl explants was
very low as mentioned above and we were able to generate seven
C. roseus lines overexpressing G(G)PPS. For PCR screening of
putative transformants, 35S forward and two different G(G)PPS
specific reverse primers were used. In both primer combinations,
seven plants out of 18 kanamycin-selected plants were positive
for G(G)PPS confirming the transgenic nature (Supplementary
Figure S5A).
The regeneration efficiency from embryogenic calli was
found to be low (3%) and there was no regeneration in
the case of explants co-transformed with G(G)PPS+GES.
Hence, an alternate approach of genetic transformation using
nodal explants was followed for co-transformation. After
co-cultivation with Agrobacteria harboring G(G)PPS and GES
overexpression constructs, nodal explants were selected in
MS-BNT medium supplemented with 70 mg/L kanamycin and
300 mg/L carbenicillin (Figure 3Bi). Most of the co-cultivated
explants turned brown and died upon transferring to selection
media. Healthy explants were sub-cultured for five more rounds
in kanamycin selection media with 70 mg/L. Subsequently,
the kanamycin concentration was increased to 100 mg/L
for next two rounds. The explants exhibited initiation of
leaves and shoot elongation from third round of selection
(∼1 month after co-cultivation). In most of the survived explants
after five rounds of antibiotic selection, shoot bud induction
as well as proliferation occurred from nodes resulting in
3–7 multiple shoots (Figure 3Bii). Individual shoots were
then transferred to fresh selection media every 15 days
and healthy surviving shoots were inoculated into rooting
medium. Although root initiation was observed in rooting
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org 7 July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 942
fpls-09-00942 July 4, 2018 Time: 19:5 # 8
Kumar et al. Transgenic Periwinkle With Enhanced MIAs
FIGURE 3 | Generation of transgenic C. roseus plants overexpressing G(G)PPS and GES. (A) Transformation of C. roseus using hypocotyl explants for G(G)PPS
overexpression. (i) Preculture of hypocotyl explants in MS basal media supplemented with 250 mg/L proline and 150 mg/L casein hydrolysate (MSCP) media; (ii)
callus induction in MSCP1 media supplemented with 40 mg/L kanamycin and 300 mg/L carbenicillin; (iii) callus proliferation and shoot initiation in MSCP2 with
70 mg/L kanamycin and 300 mg/L carbenicillin; (iv) shoot elongation in MSCP3 with 90 mg/L kanamycin and 300 mg/L carbenicillin; (v) root proliferation in half
strength MS media with 2.4 µM IBA; (vi) Established transgenic G(G)PPS plant in the flowering stage. (B) Transformation of C. roseus nodal explants for
G(G)PPS+GES overexpression. (i and ii) Selection of nodal explants and multiple shoot induction in MS media supplemented with 1 mg/L BAP + 0.1 mg/L NAA +
400 mg/L thiamine HCl + 70 or 100 mg/L kanamycin + 300 mg/L carbenicillin, respectively; (iii) root proliferation in half strength MS media with 2.4 µM IBA; (iv)
Established transgenic G(G)PPS+GES plant in the flowering stage.
media containing 2 mg/L IBA, root proliferation was only
obtained in a much lower IBA (2.4 µM) concentration
(Figure 3Biii). Well rooted plants were transferred to pots
containing 1:1 sterile soilrite:vermicompost mix (Figure 3Biv
and Supplementary Figures S4A,B). After obtaining putative
transformants of G(G)PPS+GES, PCR analysis using genomic
DNA isolated from leaves was carried out to identify transgenic
nature of plants. Screening of G(G)PPS+GES lines was carried
out by using nptII forward and reverse primers, and 35S
forward and gene specific [(G(G)PPS or GES] reverse primers.
PCR results indicated three plants positive for G(G)PPS+GES
out of 16 kanamycin selected plants (Supplementary Figures
S5B,C). The transformation efficiency using nodal explants
was also ∼3% similar to transformation using hypocotyls
explants. PCR analysis using genomic DNA with primers
specific for Agrobacterium chromosomal virulence gene (ChvA)
revealed the absence of the corresponding band, thus ruling
out the possibility of Agrobacterium contamination in both
G(G)PPS and G(G)PPS+GES transformants (Supplementary
Figure S6).
Ectopic Expression of G(G)PPS and
G(G)PPS+GES Elevates Alkaloid
Accumulation in C. roseus Transgenic
Plants
Having confirmed the transgenic nature of C. roseus plants, the
transcript abundance of G(G)PPS and GES in transgenic lines
was analyzed by qRT-PCR. First, the transcript levels in all
transgenic lines were determined with respect to WT control
plants that were also generated through tissue culture. The
various transgenic lines showed increased expression of G(G)PPS
with a 2- to 9.5-fold increase compared to WT control plants,
with maximum expression in G(G)PPS_5 followed by 8-fold
in G(G)PPS_3 and G(G)PPS_7 (Figure 4A). Transgenic plants
co-expressing G(G)PPS+GES showed increased expression of
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org 8 July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 942
fpls-09-00942 July 4, 2018 Time: 19:5 # 9
Kumar et al. Transgenic Periwinkle With Enhanced MIAs
FIGURE 4 | Analysis of gene expression in transgenic G(G)PPS and GES C. roseus plants. qRT-PCR analysis of G(G)PPS (gray bar) (A) and G(G)PPS (gray bar)/GES
(black bar) (B) in transgenic C. roseus plants. Expression levels of genes were normalized to the endogenous reference gene CrN227 and are represented relative to
the wild type (WT) controls, which was set to 1. Error bars represent mean ± standard error (SE) of three independent experiments. Significant differences at
P < 0.05 and P < 0.01 are represented by “∗” and “∗∗”, respectively.
both genes (Figure 4B). The expression of G(G)PPS was ∼7-,
3-, and 4-fold in lines 1, 2 and 3, respectively, whereas the
expression of GES was ∼5-fold in line 1, and ∼3-fold in lines
2 and 3 (Figure 4B). Next, to determine whether the changes
in gene expression were also accompanied by increased MIA
accumulation, metabolites were extracted from independent
transgenic lines and quantified by HPLC. The content of
terpenoid intermediate secologanin exhibited a significant boost
of ∼2-fold in lines G(G)PPS_3, G(G)PPS_5 and G(G)PPS_7
that also showed highest transcript abundance (Figure 5A
and Supplementary Figure S7A). There was no significant
enhancement of secologanin in the remaining four G(G)PPS
lines that correlated with the gene expression of G(G)PPS
(Figure 5A). Further, to check whether improved availability of
secologanin resulted in enhanced accumulation of monomeric
alkaloids in leaves, vindoline and catharanthine levels were
analyzed in G(G)PPS transgenic lines. HPLC analysis revealed
that the trend in accumulation of monomers correlated with the
level of secologanin in all seven lines with significant increase
of 1.5- to 1.7-fold vindoline and 1.7- to 2.0-fold catharanthine
in lines G(G)PPS_3, G(G)PPS_5 and G(G)PPS_7 (Figure 5A
and Supplementary Figure S7A). Similarly, G(G)PPS+GES
co-expressing lines exhibited a significant increase in secologanin
(∼1.8-fold) along with significant increase in vindoline (1.6- to
2.2-fold) and catharanthine (2.5- to 3.0-fold) (Figure 5B and
Supplementary Figure S7B). Although all three G(G)PPS+GES
lines showed significant accumulation of secologanin and
vindoline similar to G(G)PPS lines, the level of catharanthine was
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org 9 July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 942
fpls-09-00942 July 4, 2018 Time: 19:5 # 10
Kumar et al. Transgenic Periwinkle With Enhanced MIAs
FIGURE 5 | Quantification of metabolites in the T0 lines of transgenic G(G)PPS and GES C. roseus plants. Relative amounts of secologanin, vindoline and
catharanthine (A,B), ajmalicine (C,D), and vinblastine (E,F) in transgenic G(G)PPS and G(G)PPS+GES C. roseus lines. Secologanin was extracted from 50 mg (fresh
weight) of leaves and quantified following Tikhomiroff and Jolicoeur (2002). The monomeric alkaloids vindoline and catharanthine were extracted using 10 mg of oven
dried leaves according to Lourdes Miranda-Ham et al. (2007), and quantified following Kumar et al. (2015). Ajmalicine was extracted from roots of wild type (WT) and
transgenic plants using 200 mg fresh weight tissue following Pan et al. (2016). The methanolic extract was subjected to HPLC analysis to quantify ajmalicine. The
dimeric alkaloid vinblastine was extracted using 50 mg of oven dried leaves and quantified according to Pan et al. (2016). In all cases, young leaves or roots of same
developmental stages were used for alkaloid extraction and were quantified by using HPLC. The quantified metabolites are expressed as % levels relative to WT
controls. Error bars represent mean ± standard error (SE) of three to four independent experiments. Significant differences at P < 0.05, P < 0.01, and P < 0.001 are
represented by “∗”, “∗∗”, and “∗∗∗”, respectively.
much higher (>3.0-fold) in co-expressing lines (Figure 5B and
Supplementary Figure S7B).
In MIA biosynthesis, 4,21-dehydrogeissoschizine acts as a
branch point intermediate for the formation of ajmalicine and
stemmadenine. While ajmalicine is converted to serpentine,
stemmadenine undergoes several transformations to form
catharanthine and vindoline (Peebles et al., 2011). In order
to assess the impact of G(G)PPS and GES overexpression on
accumulation of root alkaloid, ajmalicine was quantified in
roots of WT controls and transgenic lines by HPLC analysis.
Consistent with the effect on secologanin, catharanthine and
vindoline levels, G(G)PPS and GES overexpression enhanced
the level of ajmalicine by ∼1.25- to 1.5-fold in three high
expressing G(G)PPS transgenic lines (Figure 5C) and 1.3- to
1.8-fold in G(G)PPS+GES co-expressing lines (Figure 5D). This
indicated that improved availability of GPP and geraniol due
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org 10 July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 942
fpls-09-00942 July 4, 2018 Time: 19:5 # 11
Kumar et al. Transgenic Periwinkle With Enhanced MIAs
FIGURE 6 | PRX1 expression in transgenic C. roseus plants. Analysis of PRX1
expression by qRT-PCR in G(G)PPS (A) and G(G)PPS+ GES (B)
overexpressing transgenic C. roseus plants. Expression levels of PRX1 were
normalized to the endogenous reference gene CrN227 and are represented
relative to the WT controls, which was set to 1. Error bars represent
mean ± standard error (SE) of three independent experiments. Significant
differences at P < 0.05 and P < 0.01 are represented by “∗” and “∗∗”,
respectively.
to overexpression of G(G)PPS and GES also influenced the
accumulation of alkaloids in roots.
Differential Expression of Peroxidise 1 in
Transgenic Lines Correlated With
Vinblastine Accumulation
A significant increase of vinblastine (∼1.5-fold) was observed
in three G(G)PPS overexpressing lines that exhibited increased
secologanin, vindoline and catharanthine (Figures 5A,E). With
respect to alkaloid accumulation in G(G)PPS+GES co-expressing
plants, although there was elevated accumulation of terpenoid
intermediate secologanin, and monomeric alkaloids, there was
no significant increase in the level of vinblastine in any of
the lines (Figures 5B,F). In a similar manner, when ORCA3
was expressed alone or co-expressed with G10H in transgenic
C. roseus plants, monomers were significantly enhanced without
any effect on accumulation of α-3′,4′-anhydrovinblastine and
vinblastine (Pan et al., 2012). Peroxidise 1 (PRX1) mediates
the coupling of monomeric catharanthine and vindoline into
dimeric α-3′,4′-anhydrovinblastine, the immediate precursor for
vinblastine (Costa et al., 2008). The fact that, the vinblastine
level was boosted only in G(G)PPS transgenic plants and
not in G(G)PPS+GES lines indicated a possible differential
regulation at the terminal step involving PRX1. To verify this,
transcript levels of PRX1 were determined in G(G)PPS and
G(G)PPS+GES transgenic C. roseus lines. The analyses revealed
a significant difference of PRX1 transcripts levels in G(G)PPS
and G(G)PPS+GES transgenic lines (Figure 6). All three higher
alkaloid accumulating G(G)PPS lines [G(G)PPS_3, G(G)PPS_5,
and G(G)PPS_7] showed enhanced PRX1 transcript abundance
ranging from fourfold to eightfold (Figure 6A). However,
G(G)PPS+GES co-expressing lines exhibited PRX1 expression
similar to that of WT controls (Figure 6B). This differential
expression of PRX1 could be the possible reason for contrasting
levels of vinblastine in G(G)PPS and G(G)PPS+GES transgenic
plants.
Transgenic C. roseus Plants Exhibited
Stable Levels of Gene Expression and
Alkaloids in the T1 Generation
To determine the genetic and chemostability, we checked the
transcript and metabolite levels in PCR positive T1 lines of
G(G)PPS and G(G)PPS+GES (Figure 7 and Supplementary
Figures S8, S9). First, transgene copy numbers in selected
G(G)PPS [G(G)PPS_1, G(G)PPS_3, G(G)PPS_5, and G(G)PPS_7]
and G(G)PPS+GES transgenic lines were determined by qPCR
using genomic DNA extracted from WT controls and transgenic
lines. The correlation coefficients of the standard curves of
target genes, G(G)PPS, GES, and TDC internal control were
0.996–0.998, and PCR efficiencies were close to 97–100%. This
indicated the accuracy and robustness in estimating copy number
of genes based on the standard curves. The analysis revealed that
G(G)PPS_1, G(G)PPS_3, and G(G)PPS_7 showed the presence
of two copies, whereas line G(G)PPS_5 exhibited the presence
of three copies of G(G)PPS (Supplementary Table S2). With
respect to co-expressing lines, G(G)PPS+GES_1 showed three
copies, whereas lines G(G)PPS+GES_2 and G(G)PPS+GES_3
possessed two copies of G(G)PPS. The copy number of GES
was found to be three in all the co-expressing transgenic lines
(Supplementary Table S2). The WT controls showed one copy
each for endogenous G(G)PPS and GES. Hence, the determined
copy numbers also include the endogenous copy of G(G)PPS and
GES in all transgenic events.
Transcript levels in the T1 G(G)PPS transgenic plants
exhibited higher G(G)PPS expression (8- to 10-fold) in
G(G)PPS_5 and G(G)PPS_7 lines (Supplementary Figure
S9A) similar to the levels observed in the T0 lines. However,
G(G)PPS_3 line that showed significantly higher transcript
accumulation (∼8-fold) in the T0 generation, exhibited
reduced expression in the T1 generation was comparable to
WT control plants (Figure 4A and Supplementary Figure
S9A). In co-transformed C. roseus lines, G(G)PPS transcript
abundance was sixfold in line G(G)PPS+GES_1 and ∼3-fold
in other two lines (Supplementary Figure S9B), whereas the
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org 11 July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 942
fpls-09-00942 July 4, 2018 Time: 19:5 # 12
Kumar et al. Transgenic Periwinkle With Enhanced MIAs
FIGURE 7 | Analyses of metabolites in T1 lines of transgenic G(G)PPS and G(G)PPS+ GES in C. roseus plants. Relative levels of secologanin, vindoline and
catharanthine (A,B), and vinblastine (C,D) in transgenic G(G)PPS (A,C) and G(G)PPS+GES (B,D) C. roseus lines. In the case of G(G)PPS transgenic plants, only
those lines showing significant increase in the monomeric alkaloids catharanthine and vindoline (A) were considered for the dimeric vinblastine analysis (B). Error
bars represent mean ± standard error (SE) of three to four independent experiments. Significant differences at P < 0.05 and P < 0.01 are represented by “∗” and
“∗∗”, respectively.
expression of GES varied between threefold and fourfold in all
three lines (Supplementary Figure S9B). To confirm whether
increased gene expression was accompanied by elevated MIA
accumulation in transgenic lines, alkaloids were quantified in T1
G(G)PPS and G(G)PPS+GES lines. Similar to the accumulation
observed in the T0 generation, T1 G(G)PPS lines exhibited
improved accumulation of monomeric alkaloids with no
significant change in levels of secologanin (Figure 7A and
Supplementary Figure S10A). While G(G)PPS_5 and G(G)PPS_7
exhibited ∼2.5-to 2.7-fold accumulation of vindoline and
catharanthine, G(G)PPS_3 showed significant increase of
only vindoline (∼1.8-fold) (Figure 7A). As for the dimeric
alkaloids, only G(G)PPS_5 and G(G)PPS_7 exhibited ∼1.5-fold
increase in vinblastine compared to WT controls (Figure 7C
and Supplementary Figure S10A). Among the co-expressing
G(G)PPS+GES plants, only two T1 plants showed improved
accumulation of secologanin, (∼1.5-fold), vindoline (∼2.2-fold),
and catharanthine (∼2.8-fold) (Figure 7B and Supplementary
Figure S10B). Also, similar to the T0 plants, there was no increase
in the level of vinblastine in any of the T1 G(G)PPS+GES co-
expressing lines possibly due to regulation of PRX1 (Figure 7D
and Supplementary Figure S10B).
DISCUSSION
Vinblastine and vincristine are blockbuster anti-cancer drugs
extracted exclusively from C. roseus leaves. As these dimeric
MIAs are accumulated at very low levels in leaves, increasing
their foliar concentrations would reduce the cost of production.
Hence, this study was taken up to enhance the production
of monomeric and dimeric MIAs by overexpression of early
secoiridoid pathway genes in transgenic C. roseus plants.
Previous efforts of overexpression or silencing of transcriptional
regulators and pathway genes in C. roseus cell cultures have
had limited success in improving MIAs production, indicating
a complex regulatory mechanism that balances metabolic flux
and thus MIAs accumulation in C. roseus (Murata and De
Luca, 2005; Peebles et al., 2009; Jaggi et al., 2011; Van
Moerkercke et al., 2015; Sun et al., 2017). In order to allow
higher metabolic outputs, improving the availability of upstream
precursors is an alternative strategy. Initial elicitation and feeding
studies using indole and terpenoid precursors in C. roseus
cell cultures indicated inconsistent results on accumulation of
different MIAs including serpentine, ajmalicine, tabersonine,
and strictosidine (Moreno et al., 1993; Whitmer et al., 1998;
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org 12 July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 942
fpls-09-00942 July 4, 2018 Time: 19:5 # 13
Kumar et al. Transgenic Periwinkle With Enhanced MIAs
Contin et al., 1999). However, later studies in cell suspension
and hairy roots of C. roseus indicated that the terpenoid
moiety, geraniol (not indole moiety, tryptophan) has a positive
effect on accumulation of MIAs like tabersonine and ajmalicine
(Morgan and Shanks, 2000; Lee-Parsons and Royce, 2006).
In addition, we have previously shown at the whole plant
level that GPPS and GES play important roles in providing
metabolic flux toward downstream MIA biosynthesis in C. roseus
(Rai et al., 2013; Kumar et al., 2015). Since GPPS and
GES provide starting precursors (GPP and geraniol) for the
terpene moiety formation, we hypothesized that overexpression
of G(G)PPS and co-expression of G(G)PPS+GES could push
the flux toward secologanin biosynthesis ultimately leading
to improved MIA production. To this end, we performed
transient overexpression of these genes by agroinfiltration as this
strategy has been used to validate gene function in different
medicinal plants including C. roseus (Raina et al., 2012; Rai
et al., 2013; Kumar et al., 2015). Transient overexpression of
G(G)PPS and G(G)PPS+GES lead to enhanced secologanin and
the monomeric MIAs (Figure 2 and Supplementary Figure
S3), indicating that stable overexpression of these genes in
transgenic C. roseus plants could result in improved production
of MIAs.
The lack of a reliable genetic transformation method in
C. roseus at the whole plant level has been a major impediment
for improving MIAs by metabolic engineering approaches
(Zarate and Verpoorte, 2007). Owing to the recalcitrant
nature and low transformation efficiency, only a few reports
have demonstrated genetic transformation in C. roseus using
genes related to MIA biosynthesis (Pan et al., 2012; Wang
Q. et al., 2012). Here, we generated transgenic C. roseus
overexpressing G(G)PPS using transformation protocol of Wang
Q. et al. (2012) with minor modifications. Although Wang
Q. et al. (2012) reported transformation efficiency of 11%
for transgenic C. roseus expressing DAT gene, in our case
the efficiency of transformation was ∼3%. As hypocotyl
explants co-cultivated with G(G)PPS+GES constructs failed
to generate shoots, an alternate regeneration method using
nodal explants as reported by Verma and Mathur (2011a)
was employed for transformation. This strategy yielded only
three transformants with ∼3% transformation efficiency. The
lower transformation efficiency in this study could be due
to the genotype of C. roseus used as it has been shown in
other plant species that transformation efficiency depends on
the genotype and cultivar (Wang Y. et al., 2012; Udayakumar
et al., 2014). Transgenic G(G)PPS and G(G)PPS+GES lines
exhibited varied levels of transcript abundance for corresponding
genes (Figure 4). G(G)PPS expression ranged from 2- to
9.5-fold and 3- to 6-fold in G(G)PPS and G(G)PPS+GES
transgenic lines, respectively, whereas GES expression was 3-
to 4.5-fold in co-expressing lines (Figure 4). Similar to our
observation, overexpression of DAT in transgenic C. roseus
resulted in twofold to sevenfold expression in different lines
(Wang Q. et al., 2012). In another report, overexpression of
transcriptional regulator ORCA3 alone in transgenic C. roseus
plants resulted only in ∼2-fold expression, whereas transgenic
lines co-expressing G10H and ORCA3 resulted in ∼5- and
7-fold increase in transcript levels of G10H and ORCA3,
respectively (Pan et al., 2012). Increased transcript accumulation
of G(G)PPS and G(G)PPS+GES in transgenic C. roseus plants
enhanced the content of secoiridoid secologanin, monomeric
vindoline and catharanthine, and root alkaloid ajmalicine
(Figures 5 and Supplementary Figure S7). Overall, the level of
secologanin and vindoline in three higher expressing G(G)PPS
lines and in all G(G)PPS+GES transgenic lines remained
similar (Figures 5A,B). However, there was higher accumulation
of catharanthine in two G(G)PPS+GES lines compared to
G(G)PPS lines (Figures 5A,B), suggesting that improved
availability of both GPP and geraniol could have enhanced
the accumulation of catharanthine. It was reported that co-
expression of 1-deoxy-D-xylulose-5-phosphate synthase (DXS)
and G10H in hairy roots resulted in improved accumulation
of ajmalicine and tabersonine compared to expression of DXS
alone (Peebles et al., 2011). Similarly, C. roseus transgenic plants
co-expressing ORCA3 and G10H exhibited higher production
of ajmalicine compared to plants expressing ORCA3 alone
(Pan et al., 2012). These prior findings along with our present
results suggest that overexpression of multiple genes may be
necessary to achieve significant gains in product accumulation
especially in pathways involving multiple branches, where
precursors are channeled into diverse metabolites (Peebles et al.,
2011).
In addition to enhancing secologanin and monomeric
alkaloids, G(G)PPS overexpressing lines also accumulated higher
level of vinblastine (Figure 5E and Supplementary Figure S7A).
In contrast, G(G)PPS+GES lines did not show any increase
in the levels of vinblastine despite of significant increase in
secologanin, vindoline, and catharanthine (Figure 5F). This
result suggested that improved metabolic flux (in the form
of monomeric alkaloids) is somehow not being utilized for
dimeric alkaloid formation. These findings prompted us to check
whether gene expression of PRX1 has any influence on the
accumulation of vinblastine. Transcript analysis revealed that
G(G)PPS and G(G)PPS+GES overexpressors had a differential
expression of PRX1 that correlated with the accumulation of
vinblastine (Figures 5E,F and Supplementary Figure S7). It is
not clear at this point, how PRX1 is differentially expressed
in G(G)PPS and G(G)PPS+GES overexpressors. However,
PRX1 may be transcriptionally regulated by some unknown
mechanism in G(G)PPS overexpressors leading to enhanced
vinblastine. It has been previously reported that the expression
of PRX1 and accumulation of 3′,4′-anhydrovinblastine is under
complex regulation and also depends on the availability
of hydrogen peroxide (Costa et al., 2008). In addition,
PRX1 has been suggested to act as positive regulator and
interacts with ethylene responsive factor (ERF) regulating
accumulation of 3′,4′-anhydrovinblastine in C. roseus (Wang
et al., 2016).
The success of genetic engineering depends on genetic and
chemical stability of transgenic plants in subsequent generations
(Verma et al., 2015). The copy number of integrated gene
affects the expression level and genetic stability in transgenic
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org 13 July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 942
fpls-09-00942 July 4, 2018 Time: 19:5 # 14
Kumar et al. Transgenic Periwinkle With Enhanced MIAs
lines. One or two copies of target gene integration in transgenic
plants have been reported ideal for genetic stability (Tang
et al., 2007). The integration of multiple copies of transgene
into one or more chromosomes might result in low genetic
stability, transcriptional or post transcriptional gene silencing.
Lately, qPCR has been successfully utilized for determining
transgene copy number in transgenic plants of different species
(Weng et al., 2004; Yi et al., 2008; Li et al., 2017). In the present
study, qPCR determination of copy number revealed that one to
two copies of G(G)PPS in different G(G)PPS and G(G)PPS+GES
overexpressing lines, whereas it was found to be two for GES in
all three G(G)PPS+GES transgenic lines (Supplementary Table
S2). Previous transgenic studies in C. roseus plants have analyzed
the metabolites in only T0 plants (Pan et al., 2012; Wang Q.
et al., 2012). Hence to check the chemo-stability in subsequent
generations, the level of secologanin and downstream alkaloids
were measured in T1 lines of G(G)PPS and G(G)PPS+GES
transgenic lines. While catharanthine and vindoline displayed
better accumulation in two T1 G(G)PPS lines [G(G)PPS_5 and
G(G)PPS_7] compared to that of T0 plants (Figures 5A, 7A),
the vinblastine levels were comparable in both T0 and T1
lines (Figures 5B, 7B). Among the three T1 G(G)PPS+GES
lines, G(G)PPS+GES_1 and G(G)PPS+GES_2 lines exhibited a
similar trend to that of T0 plants for all analyzed metabolites
including vinblastine (Figures 5B,F, 7B,D). As observed in
T0 lines, PRX1 exhibited differential expression that correlated
with vinblastine levels in T1 transgenic lines with higher levels
of vindoline and catharanthine (Figure 6 and Supplementary
Figure S9C).
Overexpression of GPPS and some of the terpene
synthases redirects metabolic flux toward secondary metabolite
biosynthesis, thus lowering the flux for the synthesis of
other primary metabolites thereby affecting plant growth. For
instance, transgenic tobacco plants expressing snapdragon
GPS.SSU were dwarf and displayed strong chlorosis with
reduced chlorophyll content (Orlova et al., 2009). Also,
overexpression of strawberry linalool/nerolidol synthase and
taxadiene synthase in Arabidopsis resulted in a dwarf phenotype
due to reduction in gibberellic acid levels (Aharoni et al.,
2003; Besumbes et al., 2004). In contrast, co-expression of
peppermint GPPS.SSU with different monoterpene synthases
enhanced the monoterpene production without affecting plant
growth in tobacco (Yin et al., 2017). Here, overexpression
of G(G)PPS alone or together with GES did not alter the
C. roseus plant phenotype (Supplementary Table S3 and
Supplementary Figure S4C). Selected transgenic lines were
tested for growth parameters and no differences were found
(Supplementary Table S3). As we have overexpressed a
bifunctional G(G)PPS, it could have provided higher flux
of GGPP and GPP, respectively, required for generalized
and specialized metabolism in transgenic lines, thereby not
affecting the plant growth. Indeed, two best expressing G(G)PPS
transgenic lines exhibited a significant increase in the level of
total chlorophyll indicating that enhanced GGPP production
by the bifunctional enzyme could have resulted in improved
chlorophyll content (Supplementary Figure S11). Although
overexpression of Picea abies bifunctional G(G)PPS resulted
in increased accumulation of geranylgeranyl fatty acid esters,
chlorophylls and carotenoids remained unaffected (Nagel et al.,
2014).
In summary, we demonstrate that the level of monomeric
MIAs and pharmaceutically important vinblastine can be
enhanced in plants by transgenic overexpression of genes
involved in early steps of secoiridoid pathway. While
overexpression of bifunctional G(G)PPS enhanced both
monomeric and dimeric MIAs, co-expression of G(G)PPS and
GES led to increase of monomeric MIAs higher than G(G)PPS
overexpressors. Improved accumulation of MIAs in transgenic
periwinkle without compromising the plant growth indicated the
positive role of bifunctional G(G)PPS in both generalized and
specialized metabolism. Commercial exploitation of G(G)PPS
transgenic lines could reduce the cost of dimeric alkaloids
production and co-expressing lines could be exploited for
vindoline and catharanthine production or may be used in
molecular breeding approaches to further improve the dimeric
alkaloids content. Moreover, future research focusing on stacking
of a combination of MIA pathway genes including PRX1 and
transcriptional regulators could enhance the flux resulting in
further improvement of alkaloids in C. roseus.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
SK and HS performed the experiments. SK, HS, and DN analyzed
the data. DN conceived and coordinated the research. SK and DN
wrote the manuscript.
FUNDING
This work was supported by Department of Biotechnology,
Government of India funded project (BT/PR6109/AGII/106/857/
2012; GAP-272) to DN. SK was initially supported by
Research Associateship by GAP-272 and later by CSIR Senior
Research Associateship. HS acknowledges ICMR for the Research
Fellowship.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors express their sincere gratitude to the Director,
CSIR-CIMAP for his support throughout the study. Authors are
also thankful to Dr. Micheal Long for his help with English
corrections. Institutional communication number for this article
is CIMAP/PUB/2018/01.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online
at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpls.2018.00942/
full#supplementary-material
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org 14 July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 942
fpls-09-00942 July 4, 2018 Time: 19:5 # 15
Kumar et al. Transgenic Periwinkle With Enhanced MIAs
REFERENCES
Aharoni, A., Giri, A. P., Deuerlein, S., Griepink, F., de Kogel, W. J.,
Verstappen, F. W., et al. (2003). Terpenoid metabolism in wild-type and
transgenic Arabidopsis plants. Plant Cell 15, 2866–2884. doi: 10.1105/tpc.
016253
Alam, P., Khan, Z. A., Abdin, M. Z., Khan, J. A., Ahmad, P., Elkholy, S. F., et al.
(2017). Efficient regeneration and improved sonication-assisted Agrobacterium
transformation (SAAT) method for Catharanthus roseus. 3 Biotech.
7:26.
Besumbes, Ó., Sauret-Gueto, S., Phillips, M. A., Imperial, S., Rodriguez-
Concepcion, M., and Boronat, A. (2004). Metabolic engineering of isoprenoid
biosynthesis in Arabidopsis for the production of taxadiene, the first committed
precursor of taxol. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 88, 168–175. doi: 10.1002/bit.20237
Choi, P. S., Kim, Y. D., Choi, K. M., Chung, H. J., Choi, D. W., and Liu, J. R. (2004).
Plant regeneration from hairy-root cultures transformed by infection with
Agrobacterium rhizogenes in Catharanthus roseus. Plant Cell Rep. 22, 828–831.
doi: 10.1007/s00299-004-0765-3
Contin, A., van der Heijden, R., and Verpoorte, R. (1999). Effects of alkaloid
precursor feeding and elicitation on the accumulation of secologanin in a
Catharanthus roseus cell suspension culture. Plant Cell Tissue Organ Cult. 56,
111–119. doi: 10.1023/A:1006257125191
Costa, M. M., Hilliou, F., Duarte, P., Pereira, L. G., Almeida, I., Leech, M., et al.
(2008). Molecular cloning and characterization of a vacuolar class III peroxidase
involved in the metabolism of anticancer alkaloids inCatharanthus roseus. Plant
Physiol. 146, 403–417. doi: 10.1104/pp.107.107060
Dhandapani, M., Kim, D. H., and Hong, S. (2008). Efficient plant regeneration
via somatic embryogenesis and organogenesis from explants of Catharanthus
roseus. In Vitro Cell Dev. Biol. Plant. 44, 18–25. doi: 10.1007/s11627-007-9094-x
Doyle, J. J., and Doyle, J. L. (1990). Isolation of plant DNA from fresh tissue. Focus
12, 13–15.
Dudareva, N., Negre, F., Nagegowda, D. A., and Orlova, I. (2006). Plant volatiles:
recent advances and future perspectives. Crit. Rev. Plant Sci. 25, 417–440.
doi: 10.1080/07352680600899973
Goddijn, O. J., Lohman, F. P., de Kam, R. J., Schilperoort, R. A., and Hoge,
J. H. (1994). Nucleotide sequence of the tryptophan decarboxylase gene of
Catharanthus roseus and expression of tdc-gusA gene fusions in Nicotiana
tabacum. Mol. Gen. Genet. 242, 217–225. doi: 10.1007/BF00391016
Guirimand, G., Burlat, V., Oudin, A., Lanoue, A., St-Pierre, B., and Courdevault, V.
(2009). Optimization of the transient transformation of Catharanthus roseus
cells by particle bombardment and its application to the sub-cellular
localization of hydroxymethylbutenyl 4-diphosphate synthase and geraniol
10-hydroxylase. Plant Cell Rep. 28, 1215–1234. doi: 10.1007/s00299-009-
0722-2
Ishikawa, H., Colby, D. A., and Boger, D. L. (2008). Direct coupling of
catharanthine and vindoline to provide vinblastine: total synthesis of (+)- and
ent-(-)-vinblastine. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 130, 420–421. doi: 10.1021/ja078192m
Jaggi, M., Kumar, S., and Sinha, A. K. (2011). Overexpression of an apoplastic
peroxidase gene CrPrx in transgenic hairy root lines of Catharanthus
roseus. Appl. Microbiol. Biot. 90, 1005–1016. doi: 10.1007/s00253-011-
3131-8
Kellner, F., Kim, J., Clavijo, B. J., Hamilton, J. P., Childs, K. L., Vaillancourt, B., et al.
(2015). Genome-guided investigation of plant natural product biosynthesis.
Plant J. 82, 680–692. doi: 10.1111/tpj.12827
Kuboyama, T., Yokoshima, S., Tokuyama, H., and Fukuyama, T. (2004).
Stereocontrolled total synthesis of (+)-vincristine. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
101, 11966–11970. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0401323101
Kumar, K., Kumar, S. R., Dwivedi, V., Rai, A., Shukla, A. K., Shanker, K., et al.
(2015). Precursor feeding studies and molecular characterization of geraniol
synthase establish the limiting role of geraniol in monoterpene indole alkaloid
biosynthesis in Catharanthus roseus leaves. Plant Sci. 239, 56–66. doi: 10.1016/
j.plantsci.2015.07.007
Lee-Parsons, C. W. T., and Royce, A. J. (2006). Precursor limitations in
methyljasmonate-induced Catharanthus roseus cell cultures. Plant Cell Rep. 25,
607–612. doi: 10.1007/s00299-005-0109-y
Li, S., Cong, Y., Liu, Y., Wang, T., Shuai, Q., and Chen, N., et al. (2017).
Optimization of Agrobacterium-mediated transformation in soybean. Front.
Plant Sci. 8:246. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2017.00246
Lichtenthaler, H. K. (1987). Chlorophylls and carotenoids: pigments of
photosynthetic biomembranes. Method Enzymol. 148, 350–382. doi: 10.1016/
0076-6879(87)48036-1
Lourdes Miranda-Ham, M. D., Islas-Flores, I., and Vázquez-Flota, A. F. (2007).
Accumulation of monoterpenoid indole alkaloids in periwinkle seedlings
(Catharanthus roseus) as a model for the study of plant-environment
interactions. Biochem. Mol. Biol. Educ. 35, 206–210. doi: 10.1002/bmb.60
Miettinen, K., Dong, L., Navrot, N., Schneider, T., Burlat, V., Pollier, J., et al. (2014).
The seco-iridoid pathway from Catharanthus roseus. Nat. Commun. 5:3606.
doi: 10.1038/ncomms4606
Moreno, P. R., van der Heijden, R., and Verpoorte, R. (1993). Effect of terpenoid
precursor feeding and elicitation on formation of indole alkaloids in cell
suspension cultures of Catharanthus roseus. Plant Cell Rep. 12, 702–705.
doi: 10.1007/BF00233423
Morgan, J. A., and Shanks, J. V. (2000). Determination of metabolic rate-limitations
by precursor feeding in Catharanthus roseus hairy root cultures. J. Biotechnol.
79, 137–145. doi: 10.1016/S0168-1656(00)00221-2
Murashige, T., and Skoog, F. (1962). A revised medium for rapid growth and
bioassays with tobacco tissue cultures. Physiol. Plant 15, 473–497. doi: 10.1111/
j.1399-3054.1962.tb08052.x
Murata, J., and De Luca, V. (2005). Localization of tabersonine 16-hydroxylase
and 16-OH tabersonine-16-O-methyltransferase to leaf epidermal cells defines
them as a major site of precursor biosynthesis in the vindoline pathway
in Catharanthus roseus. Plant J. 44, 581–594. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2005.
02557.x
Nagegowda, D. A. (2010). Plant volatile terpenoid metabolism: biosynthetic genes,
transcriptional regulation and subcellular compartmentation. FEBS Lett. 584,
2965–2973. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2010.05.045
Nagel, R., Berasategui, A., Paetz, C., Gershenzon, J., and Schmidt, A. (2014).
Overexpression of an isoprenyl diphosphate synthase in spruce leads to
unexpected terpene diversion products that function in plant defense. Plant
Physiol. 164, 555–569. doi: 10.1104/pp.113.228940
Noble, R. L. (1990). The discovery of the vinca alkaloids- chemotherapeutic agents
against cancer. Biochem. Cell. Biol. 68, 1344–1351. doi: 10.1139/o90-197
Orlova, I., Nagegowda, D. A., Kish, C. M., Gutensohn, M., Maeda, H.,
Varbanova, M., et al. (2009). The small subunit of snapdragon geranyl
diphosphate synthase modifies the chain length specificity of tobacco
geranylgeranyl diphosphate synthase in planta. Plant Cell 21, 4002–4017.
doi: 10.1105/tpc.109.071282
Pan, Q., Saiman, M. Z., Mustafa, N. R., Verpoorte, R., and Tang, K. (2016).
A simple and rapid HPLC-DAD method for simultaneously monitoring the
accumulation of alkaloids and precursors in different parts and different
developmental stages of Catharanthus roseus plants. J. Chromatogr. B
Analyt. Technol. Biomed. Life Sci. 1, 10–16. doi: 10.1016/j.jchromb.2016.
01.034
Pan, Q., Wang, Q., Yuan, F., Xing, S., Zhao, J., Choi, Y. H., et al. (2012).
Overexpression of ORCA3 and G10H in Catharanthus roseus plants regulated
alkaloid biosynthesis and metabolism revealed by NMR-metabolomics. PLoS
ONE 7:e43038. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0043038
Peebles, C. A., Hughes, E. H., Shanks, J. V., and San, K. Y. (2009). Transcriptional
response of the terpenoid indole alkaloid pathway to the overexpression of
ORCA3 along with jasmonic acid elicitation of Catharanthus roseus hairy roots
over time. Metab. Eng. 11, 76–86. doi: 10.1016/j.ymben.2008.09.002
Peebles, C. A., Sander, G. W., Hughes, E. H., Peacock, R., Shanks, J. V., and San,
K. Y. (2011). The expression of 1-deoxy-D-xylulose synthase and geraniol-
10-hydroxylase or anthranilate synthase increases terpenoid indole alkaloid
accumulation in Catharanthus roseus hairy roots. Metab. Eng. 13, 234–240.
doi: 10.1016/j.ymben.2010.11.005
Peebles, C. A. M., Hong, S. B., Gibson, S. I., Shanks, J. V., and San, K. Y. (2006).
Effects of terpenoid precursor feeding on Catharanthus roseus hairy roots
overexpressing the alpha or alpha and beta subunits of anthranilate synthase.
Biotechnol. Bioeng. 93, 534–540. doi: 10.1002/bit.20739
Pfaffl, M. W. (2001). A new mathematical model for relative quantification in
real-time RT-PCR. Nucleic Acids Res. 29:e45. doi: 10.1093/nar/29.9.e45
Pollier, J., Vanden Bossche, R., Rischer, H., and Goossens, A. (2014). Selection and
validation of reference genes for transcript normalization in gene expression
studies in Catharanthus roseus. Plant Physiol. Biochem. 83, 20–25. doi: 10.1016/
j.plaphy.2014.07.004
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org 15 July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 942
fpls-09-00942 July 4, 2018 Time: 19:5 # 16
Kumar et al. Transgenic Periwinkle With Enhanced MIAs
Rai, A., Smita, S. S., Singh, A. K., Shanker, K., and Nagegowda, D. A.
(2013). Heteromeric and homomeric geranyl diphosphate synthases from
Catharanthus roseus and their role in monoterpene indole alkaloid biosynthesis.
Mol. Plant. 6, 1531–1549. doi: 10.1093/mp/sst058
Raina, S. K., Wankhede, D. P., Jaggi, M., Singh, P., Jalmi, S. K., Raghuram, B., et al.
(2012). CrMPK3, a mitogen activated protein kinase from Catharanthus roseus
and its possible role in stress induced biosynthesis of monoterpenoid indole
alkaloids. BMC Plant Biol. 12:134. doi: 10.1186/1471-2229-12-134
Sun, J., Zhao, L., Shao, Z., Shanks, J., and Peebles, C. A. M. (2017). Expression of
tabersonine 16-hydroxylase and 16-hydroxytabersonine-O-methyltransferase
in Catharanthus roseus hairy roots. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 115, 673–683.
doi: 10.1002/bit.26487
Tang, W., Newton, R. J., and Weidner, D. A. (2007). Genetic transformation and
gene silencing mediated by multiple copies of a transgene in eastern white pine.
J. Exp. Bot. 58, 545–554. doi: 10.1093/jxb/erl228
Tikhomiroff, C., and Jolicoeur, M. (2002). Screening of Catharanthus roseus
secondary metabolites by high-performance liquid chromatography.
J. Chromatogr. A 955, 87–93. doi: 10.1016/S0021-9673(02)00204-2
Udayakumar, R., Kasthurirengan, S., Mariashibu, T. S., Rayan, J. J. S.,
Ganapathi, A., Kim, S. C., et al. (2014). Agrobacterium-mediated genetic
transformation of Withania somnifera using nodal explants. Acta Physiol. Plant.
36, 1969–1980. doi: 10.1007/s11738-014-1572-2
van Der Heijden, R., Jacobs, D. I., Snoeijer, W., Hallard, D., and Verpoorte, R.
(2004). The Catharanthus alkaloids: pharmacognosy and biotechnology. Curr.
Med. Chem. 11, 607–628. doi: 10.2174/0929867043455846
Van Moerkercke, A., Steensma, P., Schweizer, F., Pollier, J., Gariboldi, I.,
Payne, R., et al. (2015). The bHLH transcription factor BIS1 controls the
iridoid branch of the monoterpenoid indole alkaloid pathway in Catharanthus
roseus. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.112, 8130–8135. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1504
951112
Verma, P., and Mathur, A. K. (2011a). Direct shoot bud organogenesis and
plant regeneration from pre-plasmolysed leaf explants in Catharanthus
roseus. Plant Cell Tissue Organ Cult. 106, 401–408. doi: 10.1007/s11240-011-
9936-4
Verma, P., and Mathur, A. K. (2011b). Agrobacterium tumefaciens-mediated
transgenic plant production via direct shoot bud organogenesis from
pre-plasmolyzed leaf explants of Catharanthus roseus. Biotechnol. Lett. 33,
1053–1060. doi: 10.1007/s10529-010-0515-2
Verma, P., Sharma, A., Khan, S. A., Mathur, A. K., and Shanker, K. (2015).
Morphogenetic and chemical stability of long-term maintained Agrobacterium-
mediated transgenic Catharanthus oseus plants. Nat. Prod. Res. 29, 315–320.
doi: 10.1080/14786419.2014.940348
Wang, Q., Xing, S., Pan, Q., Yuan, F., Zhao, J., Tian, Y., et al. (2012). Development
of efficient Catharanthus roseus regeneration and transformation system using
Agrobacterium tumefaciens and hypocotyls as explants. BMC Biotechnol. 12:34.
doi: 10.1186/1472-6750-12-34
Wang, X., Pan, Y. J., Chang, B. W., Hu, Y. B., Guo, X. R., and Tang, Z. H. (2016).
Ethylene-induced vinblastine accumulation is related to activated expression
of downstream TIA pathway genes in Catharanthus roseus. Biomed. Res. Int.
2016:3708187. doi: 10.1155/2016/3708187
Wang, Y., van Kronenburg, B., Menzel, T., Maliepaard, C., Shen, X., and Krens, F.
(2012). Regeneration and Agrobacterium-mediated transformation of multiple
lily cultivars. Plant Cell Tissue Org. 111, 113–122. doi: 10.1007/s11240-012-
0172-3
Weng, H., Pan, A., Yang, L., Zhang, C., Liu, Z., and Zhang, D. (2004). Estimating
number of transgene copies in transgenic rapeseed by real-time PCR assay with
HMG I/Y as an endogenous reference gene. Plant Mol. Biol. Rep. 22, 289–300.
doi: 10.1007/BF02773139
Whitmer, S., Canel, C., Hallard, D., Gonçalves, C., and Verpoorte, R. (1998).
Influence of precursor availability on alkaloid accumulation by transgenic cell
line of Catharanthus roseus. Plant Physiol. 116, 853–857. doi: 10.1104/pp.116.
2.853
Whitmer, S., Canel, C., van der Heijden, R., and Verpoorte, R. (2003). Long-
term instability of alkaloid production by stably transformed cell lines
of Catharanthus roseus. Plant Cell Tissue Org. 74, 73–80. doi: 10.1023/A:
1023368309831
Yi, C. X., Zhang, J., Chan, K. M., Liu, X. K., and Hong, Y. (2008).
Quantitative real-time PCR assay to detect transgene copy number in cotton
(Gossypium hirsutum). Anal. Biochem. 375, 150–152. doi: 10.1016/j.ab.2007.
11.022
Yin, J. L., Wong, W. S., Jang, I. C., and Chua, N. H. (2017). Co-expression of
peppermint geranyl diphosphate synthase small subunit enhances monoterpene
production in transgenic tobacco plants. New Phytol. 213, 1133–1144.
doi: 10.1111/nph.14280
Zarate, R., and Verpoorte, R. (2007). Strategies for the genetic modification of the
medicinal plant Catharanthus roseus (L.) G. Don. Phytochem. Rev. 6, 475–491.
doi: 10.1007/s11101-006-9020-6
Zhao, L., Sander, G. W., and Shanks, J. V. (2013). Perspectives of the metabolic
engineering of terpenoid indole alkaloids in Catharanthus roseus hairy roots.
Adv. Biochem. Eng. Biot. 134, 23–54. doi: 10.1007/10_2013_182
Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2018 Kumar, Shilpashree and Nagegowda. This is an open-access article
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY).
The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the
original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original
publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice.
No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these
terms.
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org 16 July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 942
